Project Gutenberg's The Diary of a Girl in France in 1821, by Mary Browne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Diary of a Girl in France in 1821

Author: Mary Browne

Contributor: Euphemia Stewart Browne

Editor: H. N. Shore

Illustrator: Mary Browne

Release Date: January 6, 2017 [EBook #53908]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF GIRL IN FRANCE, 1821 ***




Produced by Madeleine Fournier. Images provided by The Internet Archive.




                 THE DIARY OF A GIRL IN FRANCE IN 1821


                   [Illustration: Dieppe fishwoman]


                          THE DIARY OF A GIRL

                             IN FRANCE IN

                                 1821

                            BY MARY BROWNE

                   WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY HERSELF AND

                            AN INTRODUCTION

                      BY EUPHEMIA STEWART BROWNE

                               EDITED BY

                COMMANDER, THE HON. H. N. SHORE, R. N.


                           NEW EDITION, 1918



                               NEW YORK

                       E. P. DUTTON AND COMPANY

                           681 FIFTH AVENUE


                   *       *       *       *       *


                             INTRODUCTION


The child who wrote this quaintly-illustrated diary, eighty-three years
ago, was the second daughter of William Browne, Esq., of Tallentire
Hall, in the County of Cumberland. She was born there, February 15,
1807.

Descended, on her father's side, from a race of sturdy Cumberland
yeomen, and on her mother's from the Royal Stuarts and Plantagenets,
she grew up, as might be expected from this childish production, an
original and uncommon woman.

A keen naturalist and observer of nature, at a time when such pursuits
were unusual, she delighted in long solitary country rambles round her
beautiful home: an old border watch-tower, dating from 1280 A. D., in
full view of the Solway to the north, and of Skiddaw and the Cumbrian
mountains to the south.

An exquisite collection of butterflies and moths is still in existence,
painted by her clever fingers from specimens reared by herself.
Each one is depicted upon its favourite flower, and accompanied by
its caterpillar and chrysalis on the food plant. This was, alas!
left unfinished at her death, on May 30, 1833, at the early age of
twenty-six.

A picture poem, painted on the page of one of the albums of the
period, in drawings so minute and so finely finished that, like
the butterflies, they can only be adequately seen through a
magnifying-glass, still shows her accuracy of observation, and the
dainty and patient care of her work.

She loved flowers, and the garden may still be seen where, in the very
early mornings, she planted and tended with her own loving care such
fragrant, and old-world flowers as rose de meaux, clove pinks, and
gillyflowers.

But these were only the pastimes of a busy life of unselfish devotion
to others. Shy, retiring, and strangely indifferent to appearance and
to worldly advantages, she was little understood by the merry young
circle around her. She was, as a child, even considered stupid and
slow, her governess declaring that 'friend Mary does as well as she
can.' But children loved her, and if there was sickness or sorrow in
the village it was always 'Miss Mary' who was wanted, and who was never
appealed to in vain.

At a time when rural education was viewed with suspicion, and Mrs.
Hannah More was contending for the right of the poor to win knowledge,
she and her clever elder sister opened the first Sunday-school in the
neighbourhood. They also devoted several hours of every morning to
teaching in the village dame school.

The visit to France recorded in this diary extended from April 25th to
August 12th, 1821. Mary Browne went abroad when she was fourteen, with
her father and mother and five brothers and sisters, all but one being
younger than herself, and all being alike in their childish loyalty to
their own country, and their whole-hearted conviction that everything
un-English must be bad; and that even to admire anything foreign was
the blackest treason. Starting in this firm belief, they treasured up
everything ugly, eccentric, or uncouth that they came across in their
travels, as may be seen in the primitive but forcible illustrations of
her diary, with no dawning suspicion that, though different, foreign
customs might nevertheless be better than the familiar ways.

They travelled slowly, in two of their own carriages, being a party
of thirteen, including the six children, a governess, nurse, cook,
manservant, and courier.

The long journey; the brief sojourn at school; Madame Vernier, their
cross landlady; and, above all, the children's delight at finding
themselves again in their beloved England--these are all recorded with
a vivid and naive wealth of detail, which makes the child life of the
early days of the nineteenth century live again as we read of it.

The eldest daughter, Catherine, had been in France before with her
parents, in the spring of 1815, when Napoleon Buonaparte escaped from
Elba. They were then obliged to leave Paris hurriedly, travelling night
and day for fear of detention.

To all the other children everything was new and marvellous, and their
keen, though unconscious, delight in all that they saw is evident
throughout these pages.

E. S. BROWNE.



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

   Dieppe Fishwoman

   The Home of Mary Browne, with Distant View of Solway Firth and
   Criffell

   Trees with Coverings like Tombstones.--The most amusing Thing in
   Miss Linwood's Exhibition.--A 'Pioneer' with Long Beard and Leather
   Apron.--Miss Wragge being sprinkled with Holy Water

   A French Woman and Child

   A French Boy and Girl, eating, at the Door

   Sœur de la Charité

   A French Postillion

   Limonadière

   Cabriolet

   Water-woman

   Part of the Funeral Procession

   Old Woman of Versailles

   A Priest in his Common Dress and a Boy

   Woman with the Curious Cap

   A Bonne and Children

   French Miller

   The Fountain with the Animals.--Latona's Basin.--The Cupid at
   Tivoli

   French Puppet Show

   Lavoir

   Cuirassier

   Madame Vernier

   Village Fête

   Procession at the Première Communion.--Processions at the Fête
   Dieu.-_Reposoir_ in the Avenue Sceaux.--One of the Children's
   little 'Petites Chapelles.'--A Passing Soldier in the Street.--The
   Troublesome Boy in the King's Garden

   Garde Royale. Infanterie Chasseur, 1er Régiment

   The Shepherd of the Andalusian Sheep.--Priests carrying the Host to
   Sick People.--Dancing upon Stilts.--Beggar Woman in a Bower of Dead
   Leaves.--The Virgin in the Church of St. Remis

   Louviers Woman

   Old Woman with a Cotton Cap

   Fruit-woman with Gilt Cap

   Dieppe Woman and Children

   Dieppe Market-woman


[Illustration: THE HOME OF MARY BROWNE, WITH DISTANT VIEW OF SOLWAY
FIRTH AND CRIFFELL

_From a drawing by Lady Alton in_ 1842]




                                JOURNAL

_April 25th, 1821._--We arrived at London about eleven o'clock: all
the hotels we enquired at being full, we drove to the British Hotel,
Jermyn Street. We passed through Cavendish Square, which was very
pretty, but I was rather disappointed at not seeing London till I was
in it. After we had rested, we walked through Burlington Arcade: it
was quite cool and pleasant, although the weather was as hot as the
middle of summer. There were rows of shops along each side, which had
many pretty things in them, particularly artificial flowers; not far
from this is the Egyptian Temple, which has sphinxes, etc., carved on
it: we saw the Opera House, which is a very fine building. Regent's
Street and Waterloo Place are built of white stone. Regent's Street
(when finished) is to extend a long way; at the bottom of it is Carlton
House, which is very much blackened by the smoke: there is a great
contrast between it and St. James's Palace, the latter being built of
red brick, and looks like a prison. In the evening we saw the lamps in
Regent's Street, which was lighter than any other street I saw; one
house was illuminated. We saw Waterloo Bridge.


_April 26th._--We went to see the panorama of Naples: it was a
beautiful view, there were a number of vessels in the bay; after one
had looked long at them, one could fancy they were moving: in one of
the boats there were some ladies sitting under a crimson canopy; in
another some fruit; in one place there were some men fishing for mullet
in a kind of round net, with fishes jumping through it; there was a
man swimming with a basket in one hand, and several other figures;
the ships were painted very gay colours, the water and the sky were
as clear as crystal, and the whole so natural that one could hardly
persuade oneself that it was not reality. The next panorama we saw was
the battle of Waterloo: it was not near so pretty as Naples, it seemed
all confusion; the farmhouse, however, was very natural, also some of
the black horses. We next went to the panorama of Lausanne: the Lake of
Geneva was very like Keswick Lake, but the lower end not so pretty; the
mountains did not look very high. There were a great number of trees;
some of them had on kind of covers, which looked like tombstones; the
white railings and the shadows of the trees were remarkably natural;
there were several figures, the prettiest was a little child learning
to walk. We went to St. Paul's, and just walked through it. I thought
it very fine, but spoiled by the blackness. I had no idea of the height
till I observed some people in the gallery, who looked no bigger than
flies; the pillars were very thick. In our way to St. Paul's we passed
by Perry's glass-shop; in the window there was a curtain of glass
drops, with two tassels; it had a very pretty effect, and when the sun
shone it appeared all colours, but when we entered the shop it was
quite beautiful, there were such numbers of large glass lamps hanging
from the ceiling, and chandeliers, etc., in all parts. We saw the jugs
belonging to a dessert-set for a Spanish nobleman, which was to cost
twelve hundred pounds. Also a picture of a lamp which the King had had
made there: it was gilt dragons with lotuses in their mouths; in these
the lamps were placed so as to be quite hid. I should think it would be
more curious than pretty. We passed by Green Park, and saw Lord William
Gordon's house, which has a very nice garden. We drove through Hyde
Park; the trees were very pretty, and the leaves far out; we passed
very near the Serpentine. It was excessively hot weather.


_April 27th._--We saw the Western Exchange, which is something like
a large room full of shops; from that we went to Miss Linwood's
Exhibition. The pictures were exactly like paintings; there was a
railing before them, so that one could not see very near them; some of
the prettiest were Jephtha's Daughter, a nymph turning into a fountain,
a little girl and a kitten, some children on an ass, a girl and a bird,
a woodman and a lobster; in a smaller room were several pictures of
our Saviour, the finest was a head; there was no railing before them,
and when one looked near and could see the stitches, they looked quite
rough; we went along a passage and looked through a kind of grating
in which there was a head of Buonaparte, in another a lion's den; but
the most amusing thing was some children in a cottage; underneath a
shelf lay a little black-and-white dog, which we were afraid to go
near thinking it was alive; Catherine said she saw its eyes moving.
The streets in London were a great deal prettier than I imagined, such
numbers of shops, carriages, etc.--indeed the whole far exceeded my
expectation. There were a great many carriages in Bond Street driving
backwards and forwards.


_April 28th._--We left London about half-past nine o'clock; we passed
close by Westminster Abbey, which is prettier than St. Paul's; we had
a beautiful view of London from Westminster Bridge, where I think it
looks best, all the ships look so lively on the river, and London
appears so large. Somerset House is one side of the Thames; we had
another view after we were out of the city, where we saw London much
better than when we were coming in; we saw the Monument and the Tower
at a distance: it was delightful weather, the leaves were quite out; we
saw a great number of butterflies, one kind of a bright yellow (that
I had never seen before). The country looked very pretty, but the
cottages were not so nice as those in Hertfordshire; we had several
views of the Thames; we slept at Canterbury.


_April 29th._--We breakfasted at Dover.


_April 29th._--We embarked at half-past nine on board the Trafalgar,
Captain Melle; we waited for passengers for above half an hour; the
ship was very full--there were twelve of ourselves, a foreigner, Mr.
and Mrs. Wilkinson, six children, their uncle William, Miss Ash, a
manservant and a maid, who were going to Smyrna; the next people I
observed were three tall young women with hats and feathers; they had
a mattrass put in a boat, which they lay on, there was an old woman
with them; next came Mr. Johnson, his sister and daughter; an affected
lady; Mrs. Moses and a little girl; a French lady and her daughter;
two gentlemen with plaids; a curious old man and an old lady; besides
servants and many other people whose names I do not know. There were
fifty passengers. It was so foggy that we could hardly see Dover
Cliffs. Before we sailed the old man came and sat down not far from us.
He was very shabbily dressed, and looked a curious figure. A man came
and asked him for some money for carrying down his luggage to the ship.
'Nononono, no no,' said the old man; 'I paid you for my breakfast.'
'But my master, and not I, got that money,' said the man. 'No no no
no, 'said the old gentleman, tapping the deck with his cane, and his
stomach with his hand. The man continued to remonstrate, saying that he
paid those who did nothing, and did not give anything to those who were
really useful; but it was all in vain. So he went away, and presently
returned with another man, and they both tried to persuade the old
man to give them something. 'Nono-nono-nono,'said he. 'I gave you so
much' (mentioning what it was); 'nono-no.' 'But that was for your
breakfast, sir, and not for carrying your trunks.' 'Nono-no no; keep
it to yourself, keep it to yourself,' said he, nodding, and at last
the two men were obliged to leave the ship without having accomplished
their purpose. One of them muttered as he went along, 'I'm sure if
I'd known this I would not have taken all this trouble; such work as
I've had, hunting after that old man's gloves for this half-hour.' We
could not tell who he was, nor did any person appear to know him, as
they sometimes spoke English to him and sometimes French, he always
returning the answer, 'No-no.' He continued to nod and talk to himself
long after the men were gone, to our great amusement. I was very sorry
to leave England, but I had not much time to think about it, as the
ship began to move. As I had not been in a ship before, I was very
much frightened, and when the ship leant to one side I felt as if we
were all falling into the sea together. A great wave came over the
ship, and wetted all the people at that side, who were obliged to run
up higher. Mamma was so ill, she looked like death. She said you might
have thrown her into the sea, or done anything with her. After a short
time I was sick also; indeed there were hardly any of the passengers
that were not, except Euphemia, William, and Caroline[1]. One of the
plaid gentlemen was very civil, and took Caroline on his knee. When
she was tired she crept by mamma, and fell asleep. She scarcely spoke
a word, except once: when I asked her how she liked being in the ship,
she lifted up her head, and said, 'Not at all.' The gentleman said he
had come over for pleasure, and was going back again the next day.
Oh (thought I), who can come for pleasure?--to be sick oneself, and
see every person sick around one, to be surrounded by people who look
dead or dying, to hear women groaning, and children crying, and to
add to all, to be shivering with cold--who can come for pleasure! Mr.
Wilkinson's two little boys cried, and were rather troublesome; the
youngest had an immense long whip. His little baby had just recovered
from the measles; he nursed it almost the whole time. The little girl
with Mrs. Moses had, in addition to being sick, the cramp in her legs.
The lady that was with her did not take any charge of her except
calling out when the ship tacked, 'O child! come to this side, or else
you will be drowned.' The first time somebody was sick, and called
'Steward,' our little Stewart started up and said, 'What, papa?'[2]
William told us that he looked on one side; he saw a spout: he looked
on the other side; he saw another spout: so there was nothing for him
to look at but the sea. There were a number of seabirds and fishes. We
got within sight of Calais in three hours. No boats came out for a long
while, and it was generally agreed that the men had gone to the play;
but the reason ...

(two pages missing here)

... to their mouths to make him understand, but he always returned the
same answer, 'O nonononono, nononono,' so they were obliged to leave
him. Only a few people went in the boats. We laid down on the deck,
with our head on a basket and a coat over us. The deck was covered with
people lying in a heap like pigs. It was so disagreeable, that when I
heard that we could not get in till six or seven o'clock, I thought
that I would almost sooner go in the next boat than stay where I was.
Soon after, Euphemia told me that the next boat was come, but we did
not go in that either. Soon after, almost everybody went down to the
cabin, except Carruthers, the affected lady, and me. The old man again
began to be troublesome: he wanted to get to a chair at the opposite
side of the cabin, and all at once down he got on his hands and knees,
and began to crawl over the ladies, who called out, 'O! O dear! he
will crush us.' He then wanted to go to bed, and kept poking about: he
came to Euphemia's bed, and said, 'I'll get in here. Why mayn't I get
in here?' and he stood upon a chair, and peeped into the bed. One of
the ladies called out, 'There's a child in that bed.' 'Nononono-no,'
said he, and there he stood. Euphemia prepared herself to jump out of
bed if he got in, but after looking a little while he went away. Every
time she spoke to Catherine he held up two of his fingers, and said,
'That won't do, that won't do.' The affected lady had laid her head on
our knees, and she was never still for a moment. She kept continually
asking how long it would be before we got in; it was very foggy, and
the sailors had lost sight of the fort, so this lady thought she would
direct them. 'Oh!'said she, 'I wish I could look up; I've got such
famous eyes,' and then she sat up. 'Oh yes, I can see it.' One of the
sailors tried to persuade her that one might fancy anything in a fog,
but she still wanted to direct them. 'I'm sure,' said she, 'I see the
fort. It would be much better if you were to go into the harbour.' They
at last said they thought we should not get in all night.[3] Whenever
they moved the helm, the lady screamed out that it would crush her. I
felt very stupid and sleepy, and in a short time I fell asleep. When
they were going in to Calais we went into the cabin; they took me
down half asleep, and when I awoke I could hardly tell where I was;
it looked like a burial-ground; the floor was covered with people and
basons, and it was almost dark; in a little while we heard that we were
going into the harbour, to our great joy; I thought I would sooner stay
all my life in France than cross the sea again. We reached Calais a
little after eight; every person got up and groped about: a gentleman
said it was like a resurrection. One of Mr. Wilkinson's little girls,
about three or four years old, said, 'Papa, must my kisses and cakes
go to the custom-house?' When Euphemia[4] was getting up she said,
'I think we all look like wild beasts in our dens'; one of the plaid
gentlemen said, 'And you look like a laughing hyena!' Our brothers
had been all the time in the hold with the luggage. One of the ladies
said she would never cross the sea again, except to go home. I was
rejoiced to leave the ship, having spent one of the longest and most
disagreeable days I had ever felt. When we landed it was quite dark.

                   *       *       *       *       *

After we had landed we went to the custom-house. It looked like
a public-house, there were some queer-looking men and women with
long earrings;[5] here we saw the affected lady--she pulled about
her petticoats and said they should feel that she had got nothing
about her. From this we went to Rignolle's Hotel; it was very nicely
furnished: there were very pretty clocks on the chimney-piece. We
went to bed directly after tea; the rooms had a very particular,
disagreeable smell.


_April 30th_.[6]--We took a walk on the pier: it was excessively cold
and windy; we saw the place where Louis the Eighteenth first put his
foot on his return from England--there is a little piece of brass, of
the shape of a foot, put into the stone: there is also a pillar on
which is marked the time that this event took place. There was not much
difference between the dress of the people at Calais and that of the
English. The custom-house officers had examined our things; they took
away nine cambric muslin petticoats, which were slightly run up, and a
worked gown of mamma's, which they afterwards gave her back, thinking
that she might have worked it. They took away two yards of cambric
muslin from Miss Wragge;[7] they likewise examined a shawl and a cotton
gown of the servant's many times over: the gown had been washed several
times. The servants dined at a table d'hôte; there was a dinner which
they thought very fine, a dessert, wines, brandy and coffee. Rignolle's
is a very good hotel; most of the servants speak English; it is in the
Rue Eustâche de St. Pierre.

[Illustration:

1. TREE WITH COVERINGS LIKE TOMBSTONES

2. THE MOST AMUSING THING IN MISS LINWOOD'S EXHIBITION

3. A 'PIONEER' WITH LONG BEARD AND LEATHER APRON

4. MISS WRAGGE BEING SPRINKLED WITH HOLY WATER]


_May 1st._--Being sufficiently recruited we recommenced our journey;
our horses were tied with ropes, they looked quite wild; there were
three in each carriage. Calais is surrounded with fortifications. It
was very cold, disagreeable weather. Papa has a great aversion to east
winds, and dislikes Tallantire on that account, so we expected that
in France we should find a delightful climate; but alas! no sooner
had we arrived there, than we found both east and north winds. About
Calais was the ugliest country without exception I ever beheld; there
was scarcely a tree to be seen, no hedgerows, no pretty cottages,
everything looked dirty and miserable; there was a great deal of sand,
and the country looked exactly like a desert: I thought that if this
was a specimen of France, it was certainly a most charming place! We
passed through La Chaussée, a scattered village which skirts the road
for more than a mile; after ascending a hill we had a view of the
sea, but the weather was so thick that we could not see Dover Cliffs.
Our horses began to kick and seemed very restive, but on the driver's
dismounting and calling to them in a curious voice they were soon
quiet; after we had passed Wimille about a mile there was a succession
of hills as far as Boulogne: on one of them we had a view of the town
and the tower, which was commenced by Buonaparte to commemorate his
intended victories over England. We entered the town by an avenue of
trees; we met a procession in the Rue Grande in honour of the Duke of
Bordeaux's baptism, which was that day to take place; it was a general
fête throughout France. We stopt till the procession had passed. The
principal things I remarked were the pioneers with their long beards
and leather aprons, with hatchets over their shoulders. We went to the
Hôtel Angleterre, Rue de l'Eau; it is kept by an Englishman of the
name of Parker. We breakfasted on bouillon. Euphemia had been very
unwell all day: she had no appetite; so we and Miss Wragge went out to
buy some oranges for her; we asked several people, and enquired at a
number of shops, but all in vain, and we began to despair: we, however,
succeeded in getting some of an Englishman--he was the only person in
the town who sold them; he told us that he got them from England and
was obliged to pay a high duty; we only took four, as the smallest
were four sous apiece. After leaving Boulogne the country was a little
prettier; it had not that desert appearance that there was at the
sea-coast. Before we reached Saumur we saw a woman riding like a man,
wrong side before, on a horse, and a cow tied to the horse's tail; in
some places we saw women ploughing. About Saumur it was rather pretty;
there were rows of apple-trees on each side of the road, but on many of
them there was scarcely a leaf; not any of the trees were so far out as
they were in England. The country looks barren, as there are no hedges.
The villages in France are also very ugly--there are no gardens before
the houses, and instead of the lovely cottages we saw in Hertfordshire
we here saw only dirty, untidy-looking houses; it was curious to see
the astonishment of the servants, who imagined that they were to travel
through bowers of grapes and groves of oranges. I was most disappointed
at the weather, as I expected a delightful climate in France. After we
had passed Saumur we entered the forest of Longvilliers; we saw some
large lilac periwinkles in the hedge.[8] We reached Montreuil in the
evening; there is a very steep ascent to the town; it is supposed to be
nearly impregnable. We went to Varennes, Hotel de la Cour de France;
it was a tolerably clean and civil inn. They told us there was to be
a grand illumination on account of the fête; they begged to put some
lights in our windows, and stuck two or three candles in. The servants
went out to see the balls and illuminations: they said that there were
very few lights, and that they saw some ladies going to the ball, but
that, as for the dance on the green, it was so dark they could hardly
see, but the people appeared to be in their working dresses; that there
was one fiddler; that first one person got up and ran across the green,
and then another; but it was nothing like dancing. At this hotel we
first saw the curious French beds; they consist of a pole in the wall
with the end gilt, over this is thrown a curtain; sometimes instead of
the pole there is an octagon; the beds are very uncomfortable, and the
curtains slip over one's face. The basons are like pie-dishes.

[Illustration: A FRENCH WOMAN AND CHILD]

[Illustration: A FRENCH BOY AND GIRL, EATING, AT THE DOOR]


_May 2nd._--It was a cold, disagreeable, rainy morning when we left
Montreuil; the country was not pretty; we went for a long way between
rows of trees, of which there was nothing left but the stumps; the
branches are cut off nearly all the trees, which makes them look like
broom-sticks. There were great numbers of beggars. At every village we
passed we were followed by men, women and children; if we gave to a
few they came in a double quantity up to the carriage-window; in one
village we counted about twenty. Begging seemed to be quite a trade:
in some places they brought baskets with cakes and flowers in them;
if we would not buy the flowers they threw them into the carriage. In
one place a little girl ran by the side of the carriage and said in
English 'How do you do? Very well thank you. Give me a penny, papa. How
do you do, my dear? I hope you're very well.' Papa asked them where
they had learned to speak English; they answered that the English had
lived there three years. In one of the villages where we stopped two
little girls came and danced by our carriage; they danced in a slow,
dull kind of way, and sung a tune something like our quadrilles. The
people were in general fat, plain and clumsy; their eyes were half
shut, they looked like the pictures one sees of Chinese. The women wore
a woollen or cotton petticoat with a body of a different colour, an
apron with shoulder-straps, and a coarse cotton handkerchief: some had
high caps on their heads, but most of them wore a checked handkerchief
done up like a toque, and long earrings; they had scarcely any hair to
be seen, which was very unbecoming. Their waists were generally very
short, and they looked quite a bundle; some of them wore sabots (wooden
shoes). The children[9] were heavy, ugly figures; they were quite
muffled up with clothes, and had very large stomachs, and their clothes
were tied over their breasts. They had not the liveliness of children
in England; they seemed so fat they could hardly walk,--like what in
Scotland they call _douce bairns_; they had all caps or handkerchiefs
on, even the babies. The men wore coloured woollen nightcaps; they were
much better-looking than the women. All the people looked untidy and
dirty. We passed through the Forest of Cressy, near which was fought
the celebrated battle which bears its name. We reached Abbeville about
one o'clock: we breakfasted at the Hôtel d'Angleterre, which is a very
good inn, but was rather in confusion when we were there. At Flixcourt,
where we stopped to change horses, we saw some people dancing on a
green; they told us it was on account of a wedding. In several of the
villages there were people standing at their doors eating bean-bread;
in one stage we tasted it; it was rather sour, but not bad tasting.
The people did not seem to make much use of their houses, as we often
saw them out of doors. It was above six o'clock when we arrived at
Amiens.[10] The entrance into the town is pretty. We went to the
cathedral; it has a pretty light spire: there is a beautiful portal
with figures carved all round. The inside is very prettily ornamented;
the pulpit is supported by Faith, Hope and Charity; above it are three
angels holding a curtain underneath which is the glory; all the figures
are gilt. There are two pretty painted wheel-windows; the organ is
silver, and looks rather poor. There are little chapels round the
inside of the cathedral, and images with cases of artificial flowers
before them. The pillars are so formed that when you strike them they
sound as if they were hollow. I did not think it altogether near so
grand as York Minster, but it is a very pretty thing. The concierge
told us that he had seen ten thousand in the church. When you look
up it looks too low, as if the top was cut off. There were several
nuns[11] walking up and down the cathedral. We returned to dinner at
the Hôtel des Ambassadeurs, where we slept; it is quite in the French
style, with red stone floors, no grates, fine clocks, etc.

[Illustration: SŒUR DE LA CHARITÉ]


_May 3rd._--In the morning when we asked for soap they said they had
none in the house; we at last sent out to buy a piece, and they brought
us in a bit of coarse brown soap. The soap that the French wash their
things with smells of aniseed and gives their beds a disagreeable
smell. The inn was by far the worst we met with; and the servants were
very careless. We set out with very fine weather for the first time,
and as the day advanced two or three butterflies made their appearance.
Our postillion seemed very gay, as he sung most of the time; presently
some of the ropes broke about the horses' heads, and while he was
employed in mending, with the help of another bit of rope and an old
knife, the postillion at the other carriage had also dismounted, and
was amusing himself by plaiting up his horses' tails. The harness often
broke and the horses kicked, but the men did not seem to mind it; if
we asked what was the matter, they always answered, 'Soyez tranquille,
soyez tranquille.' The French horses are little, clumsy-looking beasts.
At Hebecourt we met a kind of covered cart full of children and nurses
going to the Hospital des Enfans Trouvés at Paris; there was a soldier
to guard it, who sat on his horse like a woman and slapped his horse's
face. There seems to be a great want of living creatures in the fields;
we never met any except here and there a drove of pigs with very long
legs, or a walnut-coloured old woman leading (by a string) a thin,
miserable-looking cow. We once met a flock of sheep which followed
a man like dogs. Breteuil is a mean, dirty town; we had a very bad
breakfast in the Hôtel de ----.[12] The country about Breteuil is very
dreary and unpleasant. We saw several vineyards which were not near
so pretty as I expected: they were little, diminutive-looking things,
not so high as raspberry bushes. Near the villages we saw a number of
people washing in the _lavoirs_ or ponds made purposely. There were,
as usual, plenty of beggars; some of whom came and begged for bread
and wine. One of our postillions had a dog with him; he threw off his
gloves, the dog always picking them up and bringing them to him. Soon
after we had passed the village of Wavigny we were overtaken by a
violent storm of rain, hail, thunder and lightning, and as the storm
increased we were glad to take shelter in the post-house at St. Just.
Here we had a good deal of conversation with a servant girl; she told
us that they kept all the cattle in stables, and never out of doors.
Seeing some pigs that looked finer than usual in the farmyard, she said
that they had got them from a school where they brought up pigs. She
had a child in her arms which she offered to us all to kiss. When we
asked what it eat, she said soup and sweetmeats; she afterwards brought
it in some sugar and milk. The child had on a cotton cap trimmed with
black net: when she took it off to show us its hair, we told her how
much better it looked without it; she said 'yes, but that in France
they were afraid of their children catching cold if they went without
caps': which accounts for one's never seeing the children's neck, arms,
or hair. The people seemed to have been at dinner; there was a large
plate of cabbage, some curd, and apples on the table. Before we went
away mamma gave the girl a franc; she seemed hardly to know whether to
accept it or not, turned it about, and at last put it into her pocket
without saying a word. We were amused at one of our servants saying
'It's well we're off the _common_ now it rains' (owing to the want
of hedgerows and trees, the country did look more like a common than
anything else). When we set out the storm had abated, but the water
was running over the road in streams. A little further on the hail
was collected into large heaps, some of them nearly three feet long,
and above half a foot thick: these were lying on the sides of the
road, and over the fields for a quarter of a mile. We picked up some
small pieces: they were hail and mud stuck together; the hailstones
were bigger than large peas. A few miles from St. Just we had a very
fine view of Clermont; the town and castle are situated on a hill,
nearly surrounded by wood. It was about here that a little dog which
I fed with bread followed us for near half a mile. The country was
very pretty as we approached Chantilly: the wood of Hallate borders
the road on the left, in which we saw some wood pigeons; nearer the
town is a meadow, and canals are on each side of the road. In entering
Chantilly one of the horses got its leg over the traces, and horse
and man fell down beside the carriage; they, however, got up without
any accident. We drove to the Hôtel de Bourbon, an excellent inn. The
mistress is a nice, civil little woman; the master, who is also cook,
was twenty years in England. The rooms were very nicely furnished; in
the parlour was a jug full of lilies of the valley, which gave the room
a very sweet smell. While dinner was preparing we walked out towards
the palace stables. We passed by several neat houses, with gardens
and trellis-work covered with vines before the door. The trellis-work
was arched: I should think when it is covered with bunches of grapes
it must be very pretty. The stables consist of one enormous building,
six hundred feet in length and forty in height; above the entrance are
some very fine figures and horses. There was formerly a figure, which
the Allies melted into cannon balls when they were quartered there.
The palace was destroyed by a mob from Paris early in the Revolution;
a smaller château connected with it was spared, which is now the
habitation of the Prince of Condé. Several people asked if we wanted
to see the inside of the stables, but we had not sufficient time. It
was a very fine evening, the country round was very beautiful; there
was a great deal of wood about it. We walked a little in the garden
belonging to the inn; there were an immense number of cockchafers that
flew humming over our heads. Soon after we returned there was a great
deal of thunder and lightning. Before I went to bed I sat and watched
it at a window; when it lightened, the whole sky seemed illuminated. It
continued during part of the night, so that we were obliged to close
the windows. I liked Chantilly better than any place I had seen in
France.


_May 4th._--Before we set off we got some rolls to take in the
carriage. They were not the rolls, a yard and half a quarter long, but
quite round like rings, that the bakers carry hung over their arms. We
took a turn in the garden, where we met with an Irishman, who told us a
great deal about the stables, etc. He said that the Prince of Condé had
an extensive forest, where he was very fond of hunting; that one day he
would hunt the wild-boar, another day the roe-buck, another the stag,
and so on. After we had left Chantilly the country was very pretty,
and the forest of Chantilly soon began to skirt the road on the left.
Near Ecouen is a seminary for the education of the orphan daughters
of the members of the Legion of Honour. As we approached Paris, the
postillions were very smart, their queues were well powdered, and
at one place their boots were so large that they stepped into them.
Whenever the French postillions come near to a town or village, they
begin to crack their whips very dexterously, with which they make an
immense noise. The horses are tied with ropes, have sheep-skins over
their backs, and are always three abreast. Near many of the villages
we saw crucifixes and images. There are some little obelisks on the
side of the road, where Philip the Bold and his brothers rested when
they bore the corpse of their father from Paris to St. Denis. There is
an avenue of trees on each side of the road which bears marks of the
ravages of war. Soon after the village of La Chapelle we passed the
barrier of Paris. We entered Paris along the Rue de Clichy. We stopped
at Meurice's Hôtel, Rue St. Honoré. The sitting-room was carpeted and
had a boarded floor; there was a pretty clock and vases of alabaster
on the chimney-piece, and mirrors about the room; the furniture was a
kind of figured blue cotton velvet, which they have a great deal of
in France. Meurice and many of the waiters speak English; the inn is
very good; the servants did not seem to hear the bells, but we thought
that was probably because we were at the back of the house, rather out
of the way. The back of the hotel looks towards the gardens of the
Tuileries. We went to bed directly after tea.

[Illustration: A FRENCH POSTILLION]


TUILERIES

_May 5th._[13]--We took a walk in the gardens of the Tuileries. The
palace was founded by Catherine de Medicis, and derives its name
from having been erected on a piece of ground appropriated to the
manufacture of tiles. The front consists of five pavilions, connected
with four ranges of buildings. The whole façade is adorned with Ionic
pillars placed on pedestals. All the pillars are formed of brown and
red marble. The portico of the centre pavilion towards the court
is decorated by columns, and on each side of the gate are statues
of Apollo and a Faun. The portico towards the garden is similarly
ornamented. On the galleries are eighteen marble statues of Roman
senators clad in the toga, and in other parts of the façade are
twenty-two busts of Roman emperors and generals. The extraordinary
height of the roof in front towards the garden gives an air of
heaviness to the façade. An iron palisade encloses the coachyard of
the palace. The principal entrance to the court of the Tuileries is by
a most beautiful triumphal arch. It was erected by Napoleon, and was
built on the plan of that of Septimus Severus at Rome, and is said not
to be inferior to the original. It is sixty feet wide and forty-five
feet high. The centre arch is fourteen feet wide, the others eight and
a half. Each front is decorated with four columns, supporting marble
figures, representing different soldiers. On the outside are, on the
right, the arms of France, supported by Peace and Plenty; and on the
left the arms of Italy, sustained by Wisdom and Strength. Four other
bas-reliefs are over the smaller arches. The inside of the arches is
beautifully carved. Over the centre arch was formerly the statue of
Napoleon. The gardens are the work of Lenostre; the principal walk
extends through the whole length of the garden. The trees are all cut,
which gives it a formal look. In the parterres of flowers are statues
and basins of water; in one were two swans, and in the others some gold
and silver fishes. From the terrace of the garden towards the Seine
we had a very fine view of the river; and on the opposite terrace, of
the Place Vendôme, the triumphal column, and the Boulevards beyond.
Along the walks are rows of chairs, for which you pay two or three
sous: there are also stone seats. In the afternoon these gardens are
crowded by a gay assembly. In returning we passed through the Place
Vendôme. The buildings which enclose the square on three sides are
uniform. In the middle is a beautiful column 130 feet high, formed on
the model of that of Trajan at Rome. It is entirely covered with brass,
furnished by the artillery taken from the Austrians. The pedestal is
fitted with bas-reliefs, and at each angle is an eagle grasping a
crown of laurel. At the foot of the column commences another set of
bas-reliefs, which trace in chronological order the principal events
of the campaign of 1805: a spiral line separates each row. On the top
of the column is a gallery, and above the gallery is a small dome on
which is a white flag. There were a great many carriages in the square,
so that we had to skip first to one side, then the other. There are no
pavements for foot passengers in the streets of Paris, which makes it
very disagreeable to walk; the coachmen drive close to the very doors
of the houses, and if it were not for the _portes cochères_, one would
be run over by the carriages. The streets are narrow and dirty, and the
shops in general very shabby. There were a good many people about with
nosegays; we bought a bunch of lilies-of-the-valley and ranunculuses
for two or three sous. The flower-girls are quite troublesome; they
follow one and throw the flowers into one's hand.


_May 6th._--We were very much surprised at having a very good
plum-pudding at dinner, and on enquiry we found that they had one every
Sunday. The servants complained terribly of not having enough to eat;
they said that sometimes they could not each get a potatoe: and other
things in proportion. A great many troops passed by the door.


JARDIN DES PLANTES

_May 7th._[14]--Soon after breakfast we set out in a carriage to go
to the Jardin des Plantes. We crossed the Seine by the Pont Royal;
the river is dirty and muddy, the water is so green that it cannot
be drunk without being filtered. On the bridge were several women
clipping poodles, and the limonadiers, both men and women, were
passing backwards and forwards with their castles full of lemonade
or sorbets on their backs, their cocks by their sides, and their tin
cups over their shoulders, crying as they went along, 'Voulez-vous
boire, voulez-vous boire?' Some of them had larger things, a great deal
ornamented. When we alighted at the entrance of the botanic garden
several women crowded round us, begging us to buy a description of the
menagerie. It was a very fine day. This charming garden was founded
by Jean de la Brasse, physician to Louis XIII. At the entrance of the
garden are several square enclosures. The first contains different
kinds of soil and manure; in the second are specimens of hedges,
fences, and ditches; there are likewise every different method of
training fruit-trees, some like a cup, some like a pyramid, and two
trees fastened together with a gate between them. In another enclosure
are vegetables, and in another different kinds of fruit-trees and
bowers. We then walked to the menagerie, near which are some very
fine Judas trees which were covered with lilac flowers. The wild
beasts' dens were very large and kept remarkably clean. There were
several lions, tigers, panthers, hyenas, wolves and bears; but what
pleased me most was a dog in the den with one of the lions. One very
fierce-looking black bear was rearing up against the bars. The bears
were formerly kept in sunken enclosures, but since an accident happened
they have been confined with the other wild beasts.[15] At the end
of the menagerie is the aviary, the bars of which were so close that
we could hardly see into it; there did not seem many rare birds, but
plenty of monkeys were skipping about. Some distance off this is the
house for the elephant: it is a large-looking building near a pond,
the whole enclosed by a railing. The elephant was plunging about and
enjoying the water while its keeper was rubbing it with a wet broom.
In several enclosures were antelopes, deer, elks, and different kinds
of sheep. They were so tame as to come up to the railings and take
pieces of bread out of the people's hands. In one enclosure were
different kinds of fowls, storks, and an ostrich, and a Botany Bay
bird of immense height. There were also two old camels, and two young
ones. There were some curious long-eared goats, which were very tame.
In the pit, where the bears were formerly, are now some wild boars,
and several young ones. The botanic garden consists of more than seven
thousand plants, every one of which is labelled, and the beds are
divided by little hedges of box. A piece of water, supplied from the
Seine, is appropriated to the aquatic plants. We did not look into the
greenhouses or hothouses: several of the plants were ranged out of
doors. After we had passed these we ascended by a path an artificial
hill at the top of which is a kind of temple: from this we had a view
of the greater part of Paris. The Museum of Natural History is at the
end of the garden opposite the entrance; it is open on Tuesday and
Friday. We could not see it the day we were at the garden.

[Illustration: LIMONADIÈRE]


LOUVRE AND PALAIS ROYAL

_May 8th._--As we had taken a house at Passy, the servants and trunks
went there: but we staid till the afternoon that we might see the
Gallery of the Louvre and as much of Paris as we could. In the first
saloon of this museum are the earliest works of the French and Italian
artists. In the next the celebrated battle-pieces of Le Brun. We
then entered the great gallery, which appears to have no end; this
magnificent apartment is fourteen hundred feet in length. The ceiling
is particularly pretty. I was very much disappointed in the pictures;
there were such a number that I could hardly distinguish them. The
Déluge by Poussin is very sublime. I also admired the St. Michael
vanquishing Satan. The inside of a kitchen, and another painting in
which there is a lamp, are very natural. There is a picture of some
dogs, and another of some game, both of which I liked. A basket of
fruit and some butterflies is also very pretty.

From the Louvre we went to the Palais Royal. It was begun by Cardinal
Richelieu in 1629, and completed in 1636. It was converted by the Duke
of Orleans into a bazaar: the front towards the street of St. Honoré
was built by him after the destruction of the Opera House. It presents
two pavilions adorned with columns. After passing under a portico we
entered a square. In the centre is a garden interspersed by young trees
and encircled by lattice work; in the middle of the garden is a _jet
d'eau_, which cools the air very much. Round the square are beautiful
little shops; the prettiest are the jewellers'. In the windows were
a great many ornaments of mother-of-pearl, harps, dogs, men, carts,
etc. The china-shops are very pretty also. One very pretty ornament
was a gold boy with a china cup on his back and a dog holding a stick
in its mouth, at each end of which was a glass for ink; there were
bead-necklaces, smelling-bottles, and every kind of thing. When we
returned we went immediately to Passy. This village was about a mile
from Paris. When we arrived at our house in the Rue Basse, we found all
hands busily employed in cleaning. It was a large house, but dirty from
top to bottom. It had been occupied for a year by an English family
who had been abroad for three years; their housekeeper and lady's-maid
were English, and disliked being in France so much that they sat in
their own rooms and left the management of the house entirely to the
foreign servants. There was a courier who bought and managed for the
family. The consequence was that we found the house in the greatest
confusion. The kitchen was like a pig-sty, and the rooms were very
dirty and untidy. There were backs of books, old bottles, and all kinds
of litters lying about. There was a German housemaid who was to stay on
in the house with us, and she and our servants did little that day but
clean. Though we were all anxious to come to a house, I began to think
I would sooner have stayed where we were than come here. When we went
to bed we expected at least to be at rest, instead of which the beds
were so full of bugs that we were bit all over.


PASSY

_May 9th._--We got up pretty early, glad enough to leave our dirty,
disagreeable beds. The servants began to clean the kitchen, but the
smell was so bad that it made them sick; they therefore got two men in
to clean it; and when they came to the pipe that carried away the dirt,
they were also unable to proceed till they got a glass of brandy. The
oven was an inch thick with dirt; when it was a little cleaned they
discovered a looking-glass at the back of the oven. All the egg-shells,
stalks of vegetables, etc., had been thrown under the charcoal fires;
the rolling-pin was covered with dirt. Indeed, a dirtier place could
not have been imagined. The meat chopper was also an inch thick of
dirt. The cellar was overrun with lizards, and the closets with ants,
etc. It was rather more agreeable out of doors. The front of the house
was turned from the street, and before it were two terraces, one above
the other, which were covered with vines, and at the end were some fine
Judas trees. From the terrace we had a view of the Seine and Paris.
The weather was fine, but we none of us were in a humour to enjoy this
view. The porter that lived at the end of the terrace had a little boy
of five or six years old. François was a nice boy, but, like most of
the French children, rather forward. We walked through the village as
far as the Bois de Boulogne. There are streets in Passy like a town,
but very few shops; the people who live there get all their things from
Paris. We picked up several cantheræ.


_May 10th._--We now found the dirt so intolerable that mamma determined
to speak to Madame Gautier, the lady from whom we had taken the house.
She said that she would have the house cleaned and painted; but that
if we wished to leave it, not to consider that any agreement had been
made. (Our house had been taken for a year.) On hearing this papa went
immediately to Versailles to look after a house; when he returned he
told us that he had taken one, to which we were to go next day. We went
to bed in rather better spirits, comforting ourselves that it was the
last night we should sleep here.


_May 11 th._--This morning we were busy packing and settling our
things. We were rather at a loss about some clothes which we had at the
wash, not knowing how we could get them. The porter, however, told us
that we might be easy, as he knew a coachman who passed constantly by
the door, with whom he would send the things. That we might be sure,
we again asked him if he was certain of being able to send the things;
but he repeated his answer so often that we had not the least doubt of
his being as good as his promise. Soon after breakfast we set off in
a cabriolet, which is rather a curious conveyance, but very roomy. It
has two seats, one before the other, and it opens in front where the
man sits. It jogged very much going downhill. There is only one horse.
The man drove so close behind the cabriolet in which the servants were
that we could not see anything; on asking him to go to one side he
went straight before. Presently he stopped and took up another man,
which they call a 'lapin,' and they chatted and laughed all the way,
frequently stopping to get little glasses of brandy, as all the French
drivers do. They stopt for a long while at a post-house, where the men
got some bread out of a bin in the corner, and some wine. The people at
the inn brought us out a few little cakes, for which they afterwards
charged several francs. It was about the middle of the day when we got
to Versailles.

[Illustration: CABRIOLET]

It is a nice-looking town. There are three avenues up the middle. The
soldiers were exercising in the Avenue de Sceaux when we passed; they
exercised there several times a week. We used to like to hear their
music, but they spoilt it with drumming. Our house was near the end of
the Avenue de Sceaux, No. 6. Before the door was what they called 'Deux
jolis jardins,' which turned out to be a small garden with a walk, and
two hedges up the middle which divided it. We had not the upper story
of the house. We paid 300 francs a month. The rooms were all round a
court, so that one had to pass from one room to get to another. The
drawing-room was furnished quite after the French fashion: there was
a round table with two large pieces of marble on it; another table
supported by bronze sphinxes; a beautiful piece of furniture that had
belonged to the palace, which contained fourteen secret drawers and
several mirrors. But besides this there were two clocks, neither of
which would go; linen curtains hung on common iron rods; common painted
frames round the glasses. Instead of a carpet there was a very little
shabby piece of green cloth; and no grate; and such fire-irons as you
would not see in an English kitchen. The furniture was stamped blue
cotton-velvet. On the floor of the dining-room there was a little
ragged piece of old tapestry; this and the green cloth were the only
pretensions to carpet in the house, so that what with the want of
grates and the red stone floors, it looked very cold and comfortless.
But that we did not much mind, as the heat was what we always dreaded.
The locks of the doors hurt all our fingers, they were so stiff.
After we had thoroughly looked through the house, we went out to walk
through the town. The trees in the avenues are kept cut, which is very
formal-looking. We passed before the King's stables. They are in the
form of a half moon; before the court is a railing with gilt tops.
The great and the little stable are separated by the Avenue de Paris.
Nearly opposite is the palace. Higher up the avenue, on the side of the
Grande Ecurie, is the kennel. It looks pretty, and I think very large
for a dog-kennel; it was, however, found too small. After walking as
far as the Place d'Armes (which separates the old from the new town) we
returned, and spent the evening in condoling with one another.


VERSAILLES PALACE

_May 12th._--We went this day to see the palace and the gardens. When
one looks at it, from the side next Paris, one might fancy it was a
town of itself, there seem so many different buildings. As you go up
to it there are some curious-looking buildings in imitation of tents.
The iron railing that separates the palace from the Place d'Armes is
very much ornamented and gilt, and on each side there is a group of
gilt figures. After passing by the chapel we entered the park. On this
side the palace is 1800 feet long, and from its great length looks
rather low. The park of Versailles is divided into the great and the
little park, which united form a circuit of sixty miles. The great
park includes several villages. The little park includes the gardens,
the groves, the pieces of water, etc. There are several entrances. The
principal one is by the arcades of the palace. When one stands in the
middle of the terrace one sees the Basin of Latona, the Tapis-vert,
Apollo's Bath, and the canal at the right, the parterre of the north,
and Neptune's Bath; and at the left the parterre of flowers, the
orangery, and the _pièce d'eau des Suisses_. The whole garden seems
almost composed of statues and vases. The vases are, I think, the most
beautiful things in the garden; they are mostly of white marble (a few
are of bronze), and covered with the most beautiful carving; some are
very simple, having only a border round them, and others are covered
with figures, sunflowers, or vines. There are also a great many basins
of water. The finest is Neptune's Bath. It is a large piece of water
surrounded by twenty-two vases. There are several groups of figures:
the principal one in the front is Neptune and Amphitrite seated in a
large shell, and surrounded by tritons and naiads. Apollo's Bath is
another very fine one. Apollo is represented in his car drawn by four
horses, and surrounded by sea-monsters. Latona's basin is as curious as
any: in the middle, on several steps of red marble, are Latona and her
children, and around them, on the steps, are seventy-four frogs, which
represent the Lybian peasants metamorphosed by Jupiter on the complaint
made to him by Latona. Some of them seem half frogs and half men.
Besides these there are a great many smaller basins. There is one basin
which seems gone to decay. In it is represented the giant Enceladus
crushed under the ruins of Mount Olympus, and a number of groups of
bronze children supporting basins. Around many of them are parterres of
flowers.

The Tapis-vert is a long piece of grass, at each side of which are
numerous vases and statues. In the evening, before sunset, this is the
favourite promenade, and is quite crowded by all ranks of people. It is
a favourite game to try and walk down this green blindfold. The canal
is at the bottom of the Tapis-vert, below Apollo's Bath. It is very
long, but not very pretty, as it does not finish with anything; it is
crossed by another canal, which conducts to the Trianon.

There are a great many long avenues and squares, several of which are
closed. The avenues looked suitable to the rest of the garden, but
_very_ formal. There are also rows of yew-trees cut into every kind
of formal shape, which spoils the look of the gardens very much. The
prettiest part of the garden is Hartwell, or the King's garden, which
is made in imitation of the place where he resided when in England.
It is very like an English garden. In the middle is a column of very
pretty marble, with a small figure of Flora at the top. This garden
is railed in, but is open every evening for people to walk in. I was
very much disappointed in the orangery: it is lower than the rest of
the garden. Most of the orange-trees were standing out, but there is a
gallery to put them in. There is a basin of water in the middle of the
orangery, and borders of flowers all round. There are immense numbers
of orange, lemon, citron, laurel, and pomegranate trees:--the oldest
orange-tree is said to be five hundred years old; but they are by no
means pretty; they are all in large tubs; and instead of the branches
being allowed to spread, they are all cut like box, which make them
look still more formal. Even the flowers in the borders of the orangery
are planted alternately yellow and white. The blossoms of the oranges
are sold. From the orangery we had a view of the Etang Suisse; it looks
like a dirty pond on a common. The whole garden is open to every person
till nine o'clock, when a drum beats. At the entrance there is a list
of rules: no dogs are to be brought in unless tied with a string; and
nobody is to fish in the ponds, or to touch the statues or flowers.
Notwithstanding, however, these prohibitions, I have counted seven
or eight dogs at one time running over the flower-borders, and boys
climbing on the beautiful vases, or fishing for gold and silver fish,
of which there are a great many, particularly in Apollo's Bath. As we
returned through the court, several very ugly old women pressed round
us and asked whether we would like to see the apartments of the palace,
but we thought it was better to defer this till another day.


_May 13th._--I was very much surprised to see here, as well as at
Paris, not the least regard paid to Sunday. All the shops were open,
houses were building, and people sitting working at their doors,
seeming more industrious this day than any other; even the tradespeople
made a point of bringing their things on a Sunday. The English
clergyman was a Mr. Beaver. At church we saw several people that we had
formerly seen at Clifton and Bath; it was quite full of English.


JACK

_May 14th._--About this time a little circumstance happened which shows
the French inconsistency. We wanted a jack put up in the kitchen. The
mason and his boy came first, but not finding the blacksmith there,
they went away; then came the blacksmith and his boy, but not finding
the mason, they went away. After going on in this way for some time,
they at last all met. The mason then took out of a paper bag some
delicate-looking white powder, which, after mixing into a paste, he
layed with great care on to a fine silver trowel, and then proceeded to
dab it on to the wall with his fingers.


_May 15th._--We now began to be rather surprised that the clothes we
had left at Passy, and which the porter said he would send directly,
had not arrived. Stephens, our foreign courier, who spoke English, was
therefore despatched to bring them. We afterwards found that, so far
from knowing a person to send them by, the porter had consulted with
Stephens and asked him if he knew of any person; so that we might have
waited long for our clothes if we had trusted to the porter's word.
The French are very fond of making promises, but not quite so fond of
performing them; this we found to be the case with our house: one of
our beds broke down several times; some rooms wanted tables, some jugs,
some carpets, and all window-curtains--so that you could see across the
yard from one room to another; they found it very easy to promise all
these things, but we waited many a week before we got one. The English
family above us had one baby of a few months old, called Angelica
Ellen, which we were very fond of nursing. The lady was so ill as not
to be able to attend to it, and seemed to leave it entirely to the care
of a French nurse, who attended to it very badly. She would take it out
in the rain, or give it to anybody in the street to hold, while she
played at hide-and-seek with the old porter and his wife, who looked to
be above seventy; she one day let it fall into the fire and burnt all
its poor little hands. There is a porter to all the French houses. Our
porter's wife took care of children: we sometimes used to get her in to
clean the pans, etc.; then the nurse used to come in also to chat with
her and meddle with the things in the kitchen.


TRIANONS

_May 19th._--This day was, for a rarity, very warm. We saw in the
garden a swallow-tail butterfly and some small red moths, which
were almost the only kinds I saw in France. I never saw anywhere so
few butterflies: we thought it quite a treat to see a single white
one. There was the same scarcity of birds; and, notwithstanding the
quantity of wood in the gardens, we hardly heard one. In the middle
of the day we walked to the Trianons. The Grand Trianon is situated
at the extremity of one of the branches of the canal. We went to it
from the palace garden along a hayfield, near which we sometimes saw
the soldiers playing at ninepins. Near the Trianons were some tall
lombardy poplars and some very pretty acacias. At the gate were a great
many soldiers. An avenue leads up to the little Trianon, which, though
it is called a palace, is not larger than a small private house. The
Grand Trianon is very pretty, but looks small after the other great
palace: it is adorned with eight green marble, and fourteen red marble
pillars. We this day saw neither the inside nor the gardens, but merely
passed by it. Lower down was a pond near which some sheep were feeding,
which, with the wood of the forest, formed a pretty scene. We returned
through part of the forest, and home through the gardens. As we were
going along one of the walks we saw a great many people running,
and on enquiring the reason we were told it was to see the Duchesse
d'Angoulême: we saw her go into one of the walks which were closed,
and afterwards pass through the Orangerie. She was on horseback; there
were some ladies and gentlemen beside her, and other attendants behind.
She was dressed in a dark habit; her eyes were red, as if she had been
crying, and she was not good-looking. We saw her two or three times
afterwards, when she came to visit a college for educating priests to
send over the country, and which was very near our house. We often
saw scores of students going a-walking in their long black gowns
tucked up through the pocket-hole. They were in general very vulgar
and ungentlemanly-looking. The people did not seem to pay them much
respect, as the porter's wife and the nurse pointed, and then burst
out a-laughing when they passed. There were above three hundred at the
college.


BALL

_May 17th._--There was this day a ball given at the palace in honour
of the Duke of Bordeaux's baptism. Mamma did not go, as Mrs. Murray,
the only person she knew there, could not go on account of the death
of a friend. They said the supper was to be very splendid. We went to
a _pâtissier_ to see some of the ornaments. There were very few, and
those were not very pretty: one of the best was the arms of France,
made of cake and ornamented with coloured paste. They told us that
there were no more ornaments for supper than what we saw; but there
must have been more, as we saw people carrying several out of the shop
into another room: what we saw were merely a few in the windows. In the
evening we walked towards the palace to see the illuminations. Beside
the gate and across the court were pieces of iron this shape

[Illustration: triangle above a short line],

to which the lamps were fastened. The carriages drove up between the
rows of lamps. Mamma and my sisters were not a little surprised to see
a _gondole_ (which is the same kind of thing as a stage-coach) drive
up to the entrance. The driver lifted out of it a very fat, gouty
lady, dressed in a black lace gown over a white satin slip; she had
a white satin turban on her head, short sleeves, and dirty-looking,
lead-coloured gloves. She had very thick legs, and there was something
very peculiar about her feet. She had worsted stockings on! This is
one of the instances out of many of the inconsistency of the French,
in dress as well as in other things. The poorest-looking people will
have gold chains and earrings, although in other respects remarkably
shabbily dressed. The lower class of people are much worse dressed than
the English.


_May 20th._--We all now began to feel very uncomfortable; everything
was so very different to the things in an English house. From the
drawing-room to the kitchen all was uncomfortable, and the habits of
the people were so dirty and untidy that our three English servants
begged that they might do the work themselves instead of having a
foreigner to assist them. Stephens our courier was gone, so that we
had often to go with Carruthers (our cook) to the market to speak
for her. When she went by herself she, however, contrived to make
herself understood; she went all round the market and searched about
till she got hold of the thing she wanted, then she touched it and
said, _Combeen_. She soon learnt a few words such as _pom-de-tary,
chu, mungy, francs, sows, kickshaws_, etc.; if she did not understand
what they said she answered _Inglytary nong comprehendy_. Robins (our
manservant) got on best; he stammered out a word of French and a word
of English, till by words and signs he contrived to get what he wanted.
One word they all knew, and that was _bukkah, bukkah_; they were so
determined not to be cheated that Carruthers went all the way back from
the Avenue de Sceaux to the market if she found they owed her one sou.
Notwithstanding all our care we frequently were cheated; they will try
every possible means:[16] sometimes when the market-people set down
what we had bought, they would write down a few more pence than they
had before charged, or contrive some other way for getting money. The
provisions at Versailles were fully dearer than in England. One of the
best shops in the market was Madame Segan's, although she, as well as
the rest, would cheat if she could. The butter was very bad in France.
Madame Segan's was the best, but as there was no salt in it, and they
only got it once a week, it did not keep good. The butcher's meat
(except the pork and veal) is not good: they have a curious custom of
blowing it up so as to look very large. The French bread being made of
leaven is very sour; we got English bread from a baker at Versailles.
Another good shop for eggs, etc., is The Black Hen.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Madame Vernier, the woman whom we took the house from, was a
_restaurateur_ next door, so we often got some dishes from her. Her
_chef de cuisine_ used sometimes also to come to our house to make
dishes. It was very curious to see his proceedings; the beginning of
all his dishes was the same, a large piece of batter and a little
flour; to this he often added some bouillon. He was one day going to
make a small dish off a large dish of cold roast beef. Instead of
cutting off a few slices, (before we saw what he was about) he cut
every bit of the beef to pieces, and then broke the bones and threw
them into the _pot an feu_, to the great discomposure of Carruthers.
The French can make a dish out of almost anything. One day he began to
tell us a long story about a place where he used to dip the children,
and to show us what he meant he took little Caroline in his arms and
pretended to bathe her. This cook was a true French figure; he used to
come in with his white nightcap and apron on, and a sharp pointed knife
hung by his side. After scraping up the charcoal with his fingers he
used to dip two of them into the pan, and putting them to his mouth he
used to say, 'Très bon, très bon.' He was, however, a civil enough old
man in his way.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Another curious figure was our water-woman. She was a remarkably ugly,
vulgar-looking old woman, and like all the old French women, an immense
size. She used to wear a brown petticoat, a tattered apron, and a
knitted woollen body. Notwithstanding her uncouth appearance, however,
she was by far the most polite old woman I saw in France. Though
upwards of seventy, she one day sang us some songs very well. When she
came she used to make a curtsy and enquire after us all in the civilest
manner possible. Indeed she was nearly the only person whose manner
was at all like what I expected. Although one hears so much of French
politeness, I do not think that the French are near so polite as the
English. The men make better bows, etc., but in other things there is a
kind of forwardness in the manners of the people that I cannot admire.
If you are walking in the street and a person happens to run against
you or hit you with his stick (which frequently happens), he never
thinks of saying anything except calling out 'eh!' laughing, and then
walking on.

[Illustration : WATER-WOMAN]


MASTERS

_May 21st._--By this time we were sufficiently settled to have some
masters. The dancing master who had been recommended to us was Monsieur
le Breton. I believe he taught dancing very well in the French style
and took a good deal of pains, but he was not a very agreeable master.
The French dancing is completely different from the English; they think
it beautiful to dance on the flat of the foot and to bend every step,
which makes the dancing look very heavy: they do not like jumping,
although their steps are full of little hops. Their tunes too are very
dull. The French in general do not admire the English dancing; we
were told, however, of one English lady who had danced at the balls,
quite after the English fashion, and whose dancing had been very much
admired. The constant cry of Monsieur Breton was _pliez, pliez_, and
indeed part of the time we danced on a stone floor so that we could
dance heavy enough to please him. He had expressions like the rest
of the French, such as dancing, or working, 'like an angel,' etc. He
called the little ones Williaume, Henault, and Coquette. Our dancing
master had one very disagreeable, though common French trick; he used
to spit so about the floor that it was quite unpleasant to dance. He
taught six of us three times a week for six francs a lesson. He had the
smallest kit I ever saw. He stayed two hours each time. Madame Breton
was a dressmaker. We tried her, but she was by no means a good one. She
had three children, one of whom was an idiot; and as three children in
France are reckoned a large family, she used always to be complaining.
The best dressmaker was Mademoiselle Bouillet, Rue Charcelere. She made
our things very well; but towards the last, when she found we were
going away, she hurried over the work without taking the least pains,
charging very dear for some things, and quite spoiling others. She used
constantly to be promising us to send our things, and as often breaking
her promise. She one day told us very coolly that we might believe
_her_ promises, as she never told lies; that her little girl was in the
habit of lying, but that it was not the case with herself. Another day
she told us it was not her _nature_ to tell lies, but her profession.
The French people do not seem to think it wrong to cheat or lie, or
the least disgraceful to be told they do. Sometimes when we thought
anything we were buying dear, and told the shopkeeper that we had
bought the same thing cheaper in another shop, she answered, 'O madame,
vous ne pouvez pas; c'est impossible.'

                   *       *       *       *       *

Monsieur Violet was our French master. He was a good-humoured little
man, and spoke English very well. He generally wore a green coat and
light drab slippers; his hair looked as if it had not been combed out
for a month: altogether he very much resembled an ape. He came for an
hour every day, and charged two francs a lesson.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Miss Wragge had the best Italian master---Monsieur Pecci--in Europe (so
they told us). He charged a napoleon for twelve lessons, whether she
took them or not. He was a dark, disagreeable-looking man. He looked
like one of the banditti.

                   *       *       *       *       *

We went to enquire about Monsieur Capan, the drawing master (none of
us, however, went). He was finishing one very pretty picture; but he
seemed to have a great objection to show us his drawings: he said
it was quite unnecessary for us to see them. His pupils drew from
busts, he said; they might draw all day if they liked it, but that he
generally looked after them for an hour or so in the middle of the day.

                   *       *       *       *       *

We did not get any music master. The general run of French pianos are
not good. Madame Verny offered to sell us a harpsichord for forty
francs-certainly cheap enough; but as half the notes were like a pestle
and mortar, and the other half would not sound at all, we thought it
would be no acquisition.


FUNERAL

_May 23rd._--As we expected French young ladies to be very elegant,
mamma was most anxious that we should go as day scholars to a French
school; she thought, besides, that it would be a change, as we were
all sufficiently tired of Versailles. We therefore enquired of several
people, and were told that the pension of Madame Crosnier de Varigny,
Boulevard de la Reine, No. 55, was the best at Versailles: they said
it was not indeed the largest, but the best and the most select.
We thought that so near the capital there must be good schools; we
therefore set out this day to go and speak about it. In our way, as
we passed the Church of Notre Dame, we observed it was all hung with
black; we walked in, and enquired of some people the cause. They
answered, 'On va faire un enterrement; c'est une dame forte à son
aise.' We walked round the church, which is plain and dirty. A number
of priests, boys, and beggars went out to meet the corpse with candles
in their hands. After waiting till we were almost tired, the funeral
at last made its appearance. There first came in the beggars bearing
lighted candles in their hands; then a priest carrying a crucifix;
then a number of priests, and boys that attend the priests, in black
and white; then two priests who held a sort of black pipe, a serpent
through which they blew; after that came the coffin, covered with white
silk and bordered with black velvet: it was placed on a bier elevated
on a platform covered with black near the altar. A great many candles
were lighted around it. A priest chanted the whole way up the church
and during mass. Mass lasted half an hour. After it was finished they
made a collection, after which the procession left the church in the
same order as when it entered. The old beggars also went out, taking
their candles along with them. There were forty of them, the most
frightfully ugly creatures that can be imagined. Their skins were like
brown leather; they had on old patched petticoats; they were blind
and lame; one had a nose as big as her face, and the next no nose at
all: they were altogether the most frightful set I ever beheld. There
were not many people at the church, except some old women, a number
of whom are generally standing about the churches. (Some of them take
care of the chairs. Every person that takes one chair pays two liard,
or on great fêtes two sous.) These old women were likewise very ugly.
As the French women (except the ladies) do not wear bonnets, their
faces get sunburnt, and the old women's skins look like leather. Some
grow excessively fat. They wear a curious kind of cap, and generally
a red gown and a dark-blue apron with pockets, and a kind of large
chintz handkerchief. After leaving the church we proceeded to Madame
Crosnier's. There were two or three queerly-dressed, vulgar-looking
girls standing at the window. We were shown up into a bedroom.
Madame Crosnier is a good-looking woman, genteel, and altogether
the nicest-looking woman I saw in France: she had on a neat cotton
gown (which is more worn in France than in England) and a pelerine.
Mademoiselle Allemagne, her _sous-maîtresse_, was not near so
nice-looking. The terms were for day-scholars, who did not get their
meals there, 10 francs a month, drawing 10 francs, music 18 francs,
harp 36, dancing 9, and Italian 10 francs. School hours were from nine
to twelve, and from one to three. Thursday was a half-holiday. Madame
Crosnier showed us some of the young ladies' work: it was principally
little figures embroidered with coloured silks on white silk. Catherine
went to this school the next day; Euphemia and I not till above a
fortnight after.

[Illustration: PART OF THE FUNERAL PROCESSION]


_May 25th._--We took a walk in the forest. It is full of paths, so
that one might easily lose one's way: the wood is very pretty. It
was evening when we walked in it, and we saw one moth, the only one
I saw in France, except the cinnabars and some brown midges. We met
the King's gamekeeper, whom papa spoke to: a little further on a
drunken man passed us: drunken people were by no means a rare sight
here, although we had been told the contrary. When we got home it was
quite dark, and they were lighting the lamps, which are hung on ropes
stretched across the street.

[Illustration: OLD WOMAN OF VERSAILLES]


ASCENSION

_May 29th._--This was Ascension Day, which is a grand fête. We saw a
long procession of priests and soldiers, which I do not remember very
distinctly. After breakfast we went to high mass at St. Louis, which we
were told was to be very grand. The priests had on very fine dresses,
gold, scarlet, silver, purple, green, and all colours. It was quite
like some show; they changed places on the steps and figured about as
if they were waltzing. The bishop had on a gold mitre; he was dressed
very splendidly. There was a great deal of fine flourishing music. The
priests flung about the incense, and the little boys dressed in white
muslin over red gowns rang little bells, on which the people knelt
down. We went to see service again in the afternoon; it consisted of
nothing but loud music like a waltz tune.[17] I missed the prettiest
sight, which was seeing a lady make the _quête_ or collection for the
poor. The lady sat before the altar; she had on a white gauze gown,
and a veil which hung down behind fastened round her head with a
wreath of roses. She had on white gloves and shoes, and was dressed
as if she was going to a ball. An officer handed her about, and the
concierge went before, knocking on the ground with his stick. (The
concierge is generally a very tall man dressed in plum colour; he
goes before the priests, funerals, etc.) The lady held in her hand a
little box of crimson velvet and gold which she presented to everybody,
and curtsied; a servant followed with a crimson bag, into which she
emptied the money when the box was full. The French churches are just
like some show. We were told that a French gentleman had stayed at
the English chapel one Sunday during the sacrament; he said he was
very much struck with the stillness and solemnity, 'avec nous c'est
tout comédie.' In the afternoon, before service began, we observed a
very poor, miserable-looking man sitting with a money-box before him,
and at one side a shell full of holy water (which we did not at first
observe). Miss Wragge, thinking he was a miserable object, as she
passed dropped a sou into his box; which no sooner had she done than he
dipped a little mop which he held in his hand into the holy water, and
sprinkled it over her face. This set some women who were kneeling down
a-laughing. After mass we saw the rooms of the palace; they were very
magnificent, but I had a much better view of them some time afterwards.

[Illustration: A PRIEST IN HIS COMMON DRESS AND A BOY]


NANNETTE

_May 29th._--As we rather wanted some person to assist our servants,
Nannette, the German servant we had at Passy, was sent for. She was
most useful in going messages, as she would run all day; several people
said they were sure she was not a French woman, she was so active.
She, however, had most of the French habits; if she was making a bed,
or doing anything else, if she heard anything, down went her work and
off she went to see what was the matter. She never could do without
going to _promener_ in the evening, and going for a day up to Paris
once every week. Nannette also copied the French in eating; besides
taking the same meals as our other servants, she used to be continually
eating at odd times. Sometimes she cooked herself some _potage_, or
else she asked for _pain_ and _quelque chose_; one day she eat half a
tureen of cold sorrel soup soon after breakfast; and frequently cold
meat and bread. Besides all this, she never went out without buying
herself fruit. Her language was a strange mixture of French, English,
and German. She hated the French, and used to be very rude to them:
they in return could not bear her; they used to call her a Prussian.
Our dancing master once said, 'La Prusse est la plus vile de toutes les
nations de l'Europe.' If Nannette cleaned a room, she used to throw a
pail of water over the floor till the water ran into the passage. The
French say themselves, that nothing has spoiled the servants like the
Revolution: if anything offends them they will go off; and frequently
choose to leave you when you have company, or some time when you most
want them.


HEAT

_June 1st._--This day was excessively hot: the heat lasted just three
days.


[Illustration: WOMAN WITH THE CURIOUS CAP]


WATERWORKS

_June 3rd._--In the morning we were informed by the porter's wife
that the waters were to play. In the afternoon we accordingly walked
in the palace garden, and were very glad to find it was the case. The
gardens were very full, as a great many people had come from Paris to
see the waters play. Some of the large waterworks did not play, such
as Neptune's Bath; and some of the others only partly. Latona's basin
was beautiful; it was playing very little at first, but while we were
looking at it all the frogs began to spout water, which formed a bower
of water over Latona's head, and covered her and her children. The
frogs, lizards, etc., at the bottom, spouted water the contrary way,
which did not look so well. In the same basin at each side were two
pipes, which sent out a column of water. Apollo's Bath was playing a
little out of the horses' mouths. Two smaller pieces of water had a
very good effect: in the middle was a _jet d'eau_; on each side of one
was a lion tearing a wolf, and another lion killing a wild boar; on the
other was a tiger tearing a bear, and a blood-hound killing a stag--out
of the mouths of these figures came streams of water. The figures are
bronze. One of the large waterworks, called Le Basin de l'Obélisque,
consists of a number of pipes in imitation of reeds in the middle of
the basin, which send out a column of water to the height of 75 feet:
this waterwork was playing very little when we were there--it appeared
like a basket of froth. Some of the smaller waters are quite as pretty
as the large ones: one represents Ceres seated on some sheaves and
surrounded by children. Another, a number of children, some holding
masks, shells, and one a pair of bellows. The one that I liked best
was a small basin, in the middle of which there is a little island
which appears to be made of bronze: on this are six little children
playing with flowers, and one on each side which seems to swim or
float. Out of the island rises a column of water. The waters looked
particularly pretty among the trees. There were a great many people
in the gardens, and the variety of colours resembled a bed of tulips.
Some of the people were very oddly dressed. One woman had on a most
extraordinary cap composed of pink satin and very pretty lace; she had
a gold chain round her neck, a white gown, and pink cotton apron. (Her
cap was not at all common.) The French are very fond of colours, and
put them on with very bad taste. We saw some people with perhaps a pink
handkerchief, a blue sash, a coarse cotton gown, a yellow bonnet, and
green shoes. We saw one lady in church with a yellow bonnet spotted
with every colour; and another lady with one side of her bonnet one
colour, and the other another colour. The ladies are in general very
plain. We were told that a lady having tried to persuade an English
gentleman that the French ladies were pretty, he took her to one of
the great waterworks, where she could see ten thousand people, and
told her that he would give her a gown worth five hundred francs if
she could find three handsome women. The lady tried, but was obliged
to acknowledge that she could not. The French women have not good
figures: the old women are very fat, and the others are as flat as two
boards.[18] Many of the ladies were attended by _bonnes_, some of whom
were dressed more neatly than the French women generally are:--with
light cotton gowns, muslin handkerchiefs, and caps trimmed with
lace over blue or pink paper. The children that were with them were
queer-looking little things. The French children are old-fashioned,
dull, grave, and ugly: like little old women in their appearance. The
babies are wrapt up in swaddling-clothes like mummies, and they wear
queer little cotton hats. The nurses carry them very carefully hanging
on their arms; they say that nursing them, or tossing them about, makes
them mad. Some of the children have long hair hanging down their backs
and little hats stuck on the tops of their heads and little ridicules
in their hands. We stayed in the gardens this evening later than usual
looking at the waters, which from the terrace had a very pretty effect.

[Illustration: A BONNE AND CHILDREN]


COLD

_June 4th._--Our long-expected and much-dreaded hot weather has never
arrived, but instead of it cold, wet weather. The French said it was
an unusually bad season; they were quite _en colère_. It was this day
quite a storm; from the quantity of rain which had fallen there was a
little canal before the door; and as the dining-room was across the
yard, we could hardly get to it in wet weather without getting our
feet wet. I never felt anything so cold as it was in France. We used
to sit shivering, wrapt up in shawls to try and keep ourselves warm.
There were no grates; the fire was lighted on the hearth between two
dogs, and we used to sit round it blowing the wood to try and make it
burn: to make matters worse there were two holes, one on each side of
the fireplace, apparently made to let the smoke into the room; these we
were obliged to stuff with paper. It was as bad in bed, and though we
had sent repeatedly, we could not get any quilts and only one cotton
blanket to each bed. There were no carpets in the rooms; only bare
stone floors, from which, besides being very cold, all the red came
off on to our gowns. We were most of us sufficiently tired of France.
I would have given anything in the world to get back to England, but
we thought there was no chance of that for a long time. Every person
was dismal: one got the rheumatism, another had a cold, another was
ill, another had chilblains, and another was melancholy; and all said
they would not grumble if they did not see other people grumble. I went
from room to room, and could get no consolation. In spite of their
spectacles and processions, there was a dulness in the streets and a
want of life in the people: everything seemed to be creeping along and
looking like oysters. The boys amused themselves with a swing; when the
soldiers were exercising they used sometimes to look in at the garden
gate to watch them. The servants were very dismal: they used often to
say how much they had been mistaken in France, and what fine stories
they would tell about it when they got back to Cumberland.


FRENCH SCHOOL

_June 11th._--This day Euphemia and I went for the first time to Madame
Crosnier's. Catherine had gone for some time, and given us a very
strange account of it; but notwithstanding all she had said, it was
far worse than we had expected. There were twelve or fourteen English
girls, three Miss Stephens whom we had formerly seen at Bath, where
they did not look at all nice--they were here very well dressed and
genteel-looking; Miss Fuller, a daughter of General Fuller, who had
a French mamma, a complete little dandy; Miss Fitzgerald, who was a
little plague; Miss Molyneux, a nice little girl who had been left
there; Miss Julia Carpenter, and several others. The nicest were two
Miss Wergs. The eldest was scarcely nine years old. They were sweet,
pretty little girls, with good colours; they were a great contrast to
the French girls beside them. Ellen Werg told me that they had come to
France for their education, and that their papa liked it so much that
they were never going home again; but that they and their mamma hated
it. They used sometimes to cry when they heard the other girls talk of
going home, and say, 'Oh, I wish I was going too!' We used often to
see them at church; their papa was very crabbed-looking. They could
not speak a word of French: they left school about the same time as I
did without knowing a word more than when they came. Their mamma said
it was such a ruinous school they should stay no longer. The French
girls were the dirtiest, rudest set I ever saw. They wore very coarse
dark cotton frocks or black petticoats, dirty blue or red aprons with
pockets, spotted with ink, black worsted stockings, and listen shoes.
Some of them had large bunches of keys hung by their sides, and others
sashes and braces of broad scarlet galloon. One girl--Mademoiselle
Rose--was so dirty, that even Madame Crosnier used to speak to her
about it. She had on an old cotton frock bedaubed with ink, that did
not meet by three or four inches; through the gap one saw a pair of
dirty stays and an old striped worsted petticoat, and on the top of a
frock there was a gauze frill hanging in rags. Her hair was matted with
dirt. Some of the girls had pieces of green glass in their ears for
earrings, black velvet round their head, and gilt combs with the teeth
broken out stuck in their dirty, black, uncombed hair, which hung over
their faces. Their skins were dirty and yellow. The neatest of these
young ladies was a Mademoiselle Sélina--who was conceited-looking,
and Mademoiselle Joséphine. The girls' manners were as elegant as
themselves--they called each other names, and used the most vulgar
words. If in school-time any of them were speaking, and their teacher
reproved them, they answered, 'Vous mentez, Mademoiselle, vous êtes
menteuse, je ne parle pas.' Indeed, if they were doing a thing all
the time they were spoken to, they did not scruple to say they were
not. There were, beside Madame Crosnier, Mademoiselle Allemagne, the
first teacher; Mademoiselle Croissé, the drawing mistress, who also
taught in the schoolroom; and Annette, a kind of half teacher, who
had been one of the _young ladies_. I certainly never saw an English
kitchen-maid dressed in the way she was. A dirty cap without a border,
a black petticoat, a coarse blue gown tucked up like a bed-gown, a very
coarse kind of linen apron, and shoes down at the heels, completed
her dress. She used to go about with a broom sweeping the rooms. The
girls took it by turns to clean the schoolrooms once every week. They
used to tuck up their frocks, sweep the dirt into the _cabinet noir_
(or closet into which the litters were swept), and then throw a pail
of water on the floor and mop it up. Miss Stephens used to call it
her _malheureuse semaine_. The first morning we went earlier than
usual, school had not begun, and a number of dirty girls were sitting
or rather lying on the floor about the passages, looking like a set
of gypsies. We went upstairs to the _salle de dessin_. Mademoiselle
Croissé taught drawing. She was tall and sallow, and was reckoned
pretty. She had a pair of staring black eyes, and a great deal of long
black hair, which she seemed to admire very much, and used to bring
in pieces of butter in a curl-paper and grease it beside us. She had
done two very pretty drawings, which she kept to show. We sat down to
our drawing. Mademoiselle Croissé drew us an eye for a copy and left
us; we might do it or not, just as we pleased, she never looked near
us. Little Miss Fitzgerald had been learning drawing for a great many
months, but she had only drawn two or three sheets full all the time.
Nearly every day that I was there she did not even get out her paper,
but sat playing, talking, or running out of the room. Mademoiselle
Croissé used sometimes to stand at the window, and if she happened to
see a cat, she had such a dislike to the sight of cats that she was
obliged to send one of the girls from their drawing to drive these
animals away. At other times she was out of the room, or employed
with her own drawing, so that she had hardly time to tell us how our
drawings looked when we had done them. Once when we had just settled to
our drawings (Mademoiselle Croissé absent as usual), in came two of the
maids--'Mademoiselle, il faut sortir, car je vais baller la chambre';
we were therefore obliged to decamp. The servants were the rudest set I
ever saw. Catherine had a music mistress, Mademoiselle Pascal; but she
begged to have her no longer. One of the pianos would hardly sound, and
they had no additional keys. The mistress did not seem to understand
music very well, and she used to like heavy playing. I do not think
it is any credit in the French masters being cheap; at least, from
the specimens we saw here they got their money very easily. Monsieur
le Chevalier, the writing master, came once or twice a week; he used
to sit down at one end of the table, and never move; he had a curious
squeaking voice. I could never find out what he did except mending
pens, and those were so bad that we were obliged to get Madame Crosnier
to mend them afterwards;-she also gave us the copies: he never saw
what I had written the whole time. Euphemia one day said to one of the
English girls, 'Pray, is that man sitting there, mending pens, called a
writing master?' As for the dancing, it was quite a farce. We heard a
great deal about the _salle de danse_, so we imagined it to be quite a
fine place; but what did this beautiful _salle_ turn out to be, but a
passage leading to the schoolroom, in which we hung up our hats, etc.
There was not a chair in the place. It was to my astonishment that they
could dance at all in such a hole as it was. Monsieur Bréton taught
here. The girls dressed in the same elegant dresses as they generally
wore, and we used often to hear them laughing, crying, and romping. Of
course we did not learn.


FRENCH SCHOOL

_June 11th._--After we had finished drawing, we went downstairs into
the schoolroom. It was a long room; in it there were two tables, which
seemed originally to have been white, but they were now almost black
with ink-stains and dirt; at the top of one of the tables sat Madame
Crosnier, and at the other Mademoiselle Allemagne. We none of us did
anything but write and copy one another's writings; Madame Crosnier
sat reading the newspapers, every now and then looking up and saying
'travaillez,' or 'paix.' The girls stained all their frocks and aprons
with ink; if the rulers were inky they wiped them on their aprons, and
if there were not inkstands enough, they had a very short expedient;
they made an inkstand of the table, by pouring some ink on it into
which they dipped their pens. The paper of the room was torn off, so
that in many places one could see the canvas that covered the walls.
Round the room were hung several maps, which looked as if they had been
nibbled away by mice. The girls jumped over the stools, spirted ink at
one another, tossed about the books, and danced upon the tables;[19]
it did not seem to be in the teachers' power to make them be quiet,
though they sometimes gave them verses to write; but the most common
punishment was either making them kneel down (which the girls seemed
to think good fun), or else sending for the _bonnet de nuit_, which
they put on and laughed. Soon after we had come down, one of the
girls brought in Madame Crosnier's breakfast. She used to have such
a variety; one day fish, another asparagus and oil, another dressed
eggs, another pease, another minced beef, etc., along with this she
had bread, and wine and water; and afterwards she had a cup of coffee
and some more bread, so that she did very well. Soon after Madame
Crosnier had finished her breakfast, they had prayers; the girls knelt
down, while one of them gabbled over a prayer as quick as she could;
the only words we could distinguish were, 'C'est ma faute, c'est ma
faute, c'est ma grande faute, par St. Jean, et St. Paul, et St. Pierre'
(then all the French girls crossed themselves). Madame Crosnier and
Mademoiselle Allemagne very seldom knelt down; they used to be employed
mending pens or correcting exercises. After prayers were finished,
the girls got up and wrote as before. Madame Crosnier's two children
used to come running in, or squealing at the door most of school-time.
The youngest was quite an infant, a miserable-looking little thing,
wrapt up in a woollen cloth, daubed with dirt: the servants used to
sit in the kitchen with it on their knees, and stuff its mouth full of
curd. The other child was liked by some of the girls, but I thought
it a most disagreeable little brat: it had on a dirty, ragged, little
brown pinafore, and its face looked as if it was never washed. At
twelve o'clock Madame Crosnier rang a bell, and then all the girls
left off school, and went into the luncheon-room. The day-scholars
brought their own luncheon, mostly bread and cherries, and capillaire
or sorbet to drink; two little French girls brought a bottle of wine,
or wine and water, which they drank _between_ them. Those that did not
bring their luncheon got the sour French bread and curds, or apples.
Mademoiselle Allemagne or Mademoiselle Croissé helped the luncheon.
The girls used to eat one, and sometimes two, half slices off the flat
loaves a foot in breadth, cut very thick, and sour curd as thick as
the bread; the girls used to take dirty knives out of their pockets
and spread the curd on the bread. The English girls told us that
they got for breakfast, broth or radishes, or apples and bread; for
dinner, _bouilli_ or roast mutton, and instead of pudding, vegetables
dressed with butter; and for supper nearly the same as at luncheon.
After luncheon they used to go into the garden (which was more like
a wilderness) and skip or run, or sit and talk, or else they used
to amuse themselves in the house, in making little baskets, fishes,
crosses, birds, etc., of beads; which was very agreeable work.[20] At
one o'clock the bell rang again, and we employed ourselves much the
same as in the morning, till two o'clock, when school was over. Annette
taught in a different room, principally the little ones. We once looked
in: all the little girls were sitting dawdling and scribbling round
the table up to their elbows in ink; Annette was walking round rapping
the table with a short ruler and saying 'travaillez, travaillez.' The
youngest of her scholars, who was only five years old, used to walk up
and down the passages most of schooltime, and if any of the English
girls spoke to her she used to say, 'Moitié Anglaise, moitié Anglaise.'
She could, however, speak nothing but French. Notwithstanding the
number of English, not one of the French girls could speak a word of
English except Mademoiselle Selina, who used to say 'Good nih, good
morning.'[21]

We were altogether very much astonished at this _genteel_ and select
school; if I had not seen it, I could not have thought it possible for
the girls to be specimens of French young ladies. I only attended a
month, and though, at first, it was a change, I was not sorry to leave
such a dirty, disagreeable place. Catherine and Euphemia were ill, and
therefore stayed a much shorter time. Madame Crosnier's fête was some
months after. I was told that on her fête she gave a ball and supper,
to which she invited (besides her own friends) all the young ladies
and their parents. One English girl said if she might she would have
no wish to come, for she knew they would get nothing but scraps to eat
and sugar and water to drink.[22] Before the fête it is the custom
to give Madame Crosnier a present. One year they gave her a gown,
another year a carpet, and this year it was to be a clock. Each of the
girls subscribed ten francs or 8s. 4d., and some of the little ones
six francs. They also gave a drawing or some present of their own. At
Christmas they each gave a pound of tea or sugar, or a pair of gloves
or some other thing.

[Illustration: FRENCH MILLER]

Before the girls took their _première communion_ (which they take as
soon as they are ten years old) Madame Crosnier instructed them a great
deal on their catechism, etc.; they did not come down or speak to any
of the other girls for a week before.

Near the stables there were several girls who used to beg from every
person they met; two were quite rude. As we went we used to see people
sitting out of doors getting their breakfasts or dinners. They seemed
to have very curious messes: bread and fruit, broth, and porringers of
preserves into which they dipt their bread, for dinner. On one bench
we generally used to see a number of millers[23] sitting getting their
breakfast, with a very long roll and a knife in their hands, and a
bottle of _vin ordinaire_ beside them.


RUDE BOY

_June 14th._--We had been with Carruthers to the market, and after she
had bought her things, as there were more than she could carry, she
got a boy (of whom there were plenty ready) to carry some of her goods
home for her. When we reached home she paid him the common price, but
to our surprise he refused to take it unless he could get a great deal
more; she then offered him some meat and bread besides the money, but
this he also refused unless he might carry away the plate; and to try
and frighten Carruthers he said he would go and bring the commissaire.
After remaining for a quarter of an hour the porter's wife came in, and
after scolding him for some time she at last obliged him to take the
money (which she said was more than was usually given) and the meat and
go away, which he did, abusing Carruthers all the way. This was one of
the boys who used to point at us on our way to school.


TRIP TO PARIS

_June 15th._--I this day went to Paris with mamma and papa: papa had
been staying there for a few days. We had a very pleasant ride, and
reached the Hôtel du Mont Blanc, Rue de la Paix, where papa had been
before. This street is one of the best in Paris; there are footpaths at
the sides, and the boulevards run along the bottom. We walked along the
boulevards under the rows of trees; at one side there are the Chinese
baths, the outsides of which are curiously ornamented with artificial
rocks and figures holding umbrellas, etc. There seemed to be a great
many people idling about. There was a man with a canary in a kind of
moss bower; the bird was so tame as to sit still without attempting to
fly away. There was another man with a tame hedgehog, which he held
up in his hand to the people; it seemed to be playing tricks. We went
through the Passage des Panoramas, where we bought a bunch of clear
beads for five sous, a sou dearer than at Versailles. We afterwards
went to the Palais Royal, where they asked eight sous a bunch: the
shops in the Palais Royal are very dear and disagreeable. There were
some curious things at the windows.


FLOWER MARKET--TIVOLI, ETC.

_June 16th._--A very fine day. After breakfast we went in a coach to
the flower-market. We walked down it: the women had on large straw
hats. There were rows of flower-pots down each side, the prettiest
collection I ever saw. There were roses, carnations, myrtles,
beautiful campanulas, geraniums, Madagascar periwinkles, etc.:
there were also strawberries, currant, apple and orange trees, all
in pots. The apple-trees were a a very small kind, the branches of
which were covered with fruit; there were likewise little oranges on
the orange-trees. From this we drove to the Church of St. Sulpice.
There is a picture over the altar on which the light falls from the
top. There was a wedding going on in it when we entered. They were a
curious-looking pair that were married. I was not near enough to see
plainly what the priest was doing, but when the ceremony was over he
passed close by us muttering to himself all the way; he was dressed
very finely, but he was the most horrid-looking old man I ever saw; he
reminded us of the Inquisition and everything horrible.

Near the church is the Fontaine de St. Sulpice; it is a very plain
little fountain. From this we went to Notre Dame, where we saw the end
of a christening. After that we went to the Fontaine des Innocents; it
is a large, high fountain, with several lions' heads, which were not
playing when we saw it. From this we drove to Tivoli. In going to it we
passed through the narrowest streets I was ever in. I do not think two
carriages could possibly have passed. They were very dirty and close,
and had such disagreeable smells; I was not sorry to get through them.
We got out at Tivoli, and walked under a kind of trellis-work up to the
house where you pay. Tivoli is not near so nice, or so large as Sydney
Gardens at Bath. There are several winding walks bordered with Austrian
roses, box, etc. There are a great number of swings and roundabouts
of ships, swans, and horses. We saw a man playing at a kind of game;
to a long wooden box was fastened a string with a wooden bird at the
end of it; he threw it so as to fire a pistol, and then Cupid came out
of the top. At one part of the garden there is a steep hill; at the
top is a temple, and near the bottom a sort of grotto; at the top are
kinds of carriages, and whoever wants to ride down gets into one; they
slide in grooves down the hill and under the grotto. I should think
it would be a frightful thing. After we had walked over the garden we
went into a café and got some cakes and wine. We then left Tivoli and
walked up to Montmartre; it is very steep up to it, but when one gets
to the top near some windmills one has a view of the whole of Paris
and the country round it, quite like a panorama. On our way home we
stopped at several shops to buy a cap; but they asked us very dear, and
had nothing particularly nice. At some shops there is written 'English
spoken here,' and on one 'English _spiked_ here.' It requires a great
deal of bargaining to get things for a right price. At some shops there
is written 'prix fixe.' The people in the shops are remarkably plain,
and plainly dressed.

[Illustration: THE FOUNTAIN WITH THE ANIMALS]

[Illustration: THE CUPID AT TIVOLI]

[Illustration: LATONA'S BASIN]


SUNDAY

_June 17th._--No sooner were we out of bed than there came several men
before our windows, and played tunes. One man came into the street
with a fiddle, which he played on, made grimaces, and jumped about as
if he were crazy. He was a most extraordinary-looking creature; he
was dressed like a merry-andrew, with a white wig and a queue on his
head; if one had seen him in England one would have thought he was mad.
While he was capering about, another man came into the street with a
puppet-show; he put a table on the ground, and made first some men
and women, and then a carriage, go round it[24] In the middle of the
day we walked in the gardens of the Tuileries, which were excessively
crowded, and through the square of the Louvre. It is the most beautiful
thing of the kind I ever saw; I think it is a much more magnificent
palace than that of Versailles. It is beautifully carved round every
window and door, and excessively white and clean-looking. I altogether
admired this palace, and the Colonne de la Place Vendôme, the most of
any of the buildings in Paris. In the evening I walked with papa on
the boulevards as far as the Fontaine de Bondy, which was not playing.
It was dark when we came back, and the boulevards were crowded with
people. The cafés were lighted up, and were full of people sitting
taking refreshments. There were stalls like a fair, puppet-shows, and
conjurers. I never saw anything so unlike Sunday.[25]

[Illustration : FRENCH PUPPET SHOW]



LUXEMBOURG-MAN AND STILTS, ETC.

_June 18th._--We went to the Palais Royal (on our way we bought a
souvenir). I wanted some little remembrance of France: we went into
several shops in the Palais Royal, and the cheapest thing I could get
there was a little gilt cart and horse, for which the woman asked ten
francs. We, however, got it for eight, which was far too much, as we
got as pretty a one in the Rue de la Paix for half the price; we also
got some silk winders of mother-of-pearl. The shops in the Palais Royal
are very dear and disagreeable: the people seem to make quite a favour
of selling you anything.[26] Near this we got some strawberries and
cream in a café (Véfours). After that we drove to the Luxembourg. We
walked in the gardens, which are _very_ formal, but pretty in their
way; there are a great many flowers and roses growing out of the banks
of grass. There are a few basins of water, and a great number of
statues. We did not see the inside of the palace. As we were returning
we saw the King in his coach a good way before us; he had a great many
attendants with him. In the afternoon we dined at Major Cape's. Most of
the party liked France very much. Just before we went there we saw a
crowd in the street, and after looking a little while we observed a man
dressed up in scarlet _à la_ Henri Quatre, with a feather in his hat,
on horseback. He rode up and down, and seemed to be making a speech.
The people then made a large circle round him, and three little boys
and a girl who were with him, dressed up like merry-andrews, got on
stilts, and marched and danced before him. The man then got off his
horse, and got on stilts; the man and the children were on stilts so as
to make them the same height, so that the least, who did not look above
five or six years old, must have been more than a yard from the ground.
They all took hold of hands, waltzed, _sauteused_, ran under each
other's arms, and danced a fine figure-dance. The man did the worst.
They danced to the beating of a drum; the little one curtsied on his
stilts, and after they had done, the man put him on the horse, and sent
him round to collect money. We stayed very late at Major Cape's; and I
was glad to go to bed when we came in.


RETURN TO VERSAILLES

_June 19th._--This was the last day I was to stay in Paris, for which
I was very sorry, as I liked being in Paris a great deal better than
in Versailles. There are some very amusing things in Paris, though I
do not think it is to be compared to London. We expected Miss Wragge
and brothers and sisters to see the museum, which we had been long
promised. Miss Wragge, Barbara, the two boys, and Caroline came just
after we had finished breakfast; but Catherine and Euphemia were so ill
they could not come. (Catherine was not well when we came to Paris, but
we hoped by this time she would have been better.) After they had come
we bought some gilt gigs, baskets, etc., in a _very_ cheap, _civil_
shop in the Rue de la Paix, where there were a great many little
ornaments. We also bought some silk shoes at a good shop near. After we
came in, Mr. and Mrs. Fisher called. We did not go to the museum, but
went instead to the Louvre, where we had a longer view of the pictures
than before; I did not like them better this time than when I first
saw them. There were several Quakers in the Louvre; we saw some in
the streets of Paris at different times. As soon as we came back from
the Louvre we returned to Versailles. On our way we saw the Duchesse
d'Angoulême in an open carriage. When we reached the Avenue de Sceaux
we found Catherine _very_ ill, and Euphemia not at all well.



COMMUNION

_June 20th._--Before breakfast we went to see the girls and boys take
their _première communion_ at Notre Dame. The church was so full we
could hardly get near to see them.[27] The first set of young ladies
that came in were dressed in white muslin frocks trimmed with lace
and satin, white sashes, gloves, shoes, and ridicules, lace and white
satin caps, and lace or muslin veils; the next set were dressed in the
same way with pink sashes; the third set blue; the fourth set green;
and the two next sets white. After that came a school of girls dressed
in buff cotton frocks and common muslin veils, who seemed to be poor
girls: several nuns sat with them. Another set had on thick white
frocks. All the girls sat in a seat by themselves. The boys had bows
of white ribbon on their arms. Madame Crosnier's school was very smart
with white sashes like the others; those of her girls who did not take
their communion were dressed in neat white frocks, scarlet sashes, and
Leghorn bonnets. Madame Crosnier and her teachers were very nicely
dressed. The girls had every advantage that dress could give them; but
we could not help remarking how very different a set of English girls
would look to those with their dingy complexions. They had candles
in their hands, which they lighted and blew out several times during
mass. Some of the candles were very much ornamented with gold paper,
etc.; one had a little gilt basket filled with flowers round it, and
others lyres on them. I thought there was a great chance of the girls
setting fire to each other as they sat close together. While we were in
the church there were two women with a little child beside us, which
squalled and fretted the whole time. It first would have one thing,
and then another. The women managed it excessively stupidly; they
first gave it a cake, then snatched it away from it, then whipped it,
then kissed it; and they looked at each other as much as to say it is
impossible to make it be quiet. The French children are little petted,
disagreeable, spoiled things; they say that it hurts their health to
find fault with them.[28] They are very dirty, and their heads are
covered with a cap of dirt which they call the _Écaille du bon Dieu_,
and it is reckoned a kind of sacrilege to take it off. Even the highest
ranks of people do not comb their children's hair till they are two
years old, that they may be covered with this cap of dirt, which, they
say, prevents them having sore eyes and makes them cut their teeth
easily. Another prejudice that they have is that nursing and tossing
the children about makes them mad; the doctors say that it is only the
dull air of _England_ that requires it:[29] some of them say that it
is that which causes so many mad people in England. The consequence is
that the French babies are dull, heavy, and stupid. We were obliged to
leave the church to go to breakfast, so we missed seeing the girls take
the sacrament, which they take on their tongues and eat whole without
breaking it. After they had done we saw them go home; Madame Crosnier's
school went in a coach. In the evening we went again to Notre Dame,
where one of the priests preached a sermon to the boys and girls that
had taken the sacrament, and told them to prepare for being confirmed
the next morning. After the sermon was finished they walked in
procession round the inside of the church, the girls first and the boys
after, with lighted candles in their hands. Some of the candles were
so much broken that they could hardly hold them upright. One or two of
the girls did not look more than six or seven years old: we supposed
that they had not been taking the communion, but were only walking in
the procession. It was altogether a pretty sight. After they had walked
round the church they all went home. When they receive their _première
communion_ it is customary to give the priest something: this time they
gave a clock.


TREE BURNT DOWN

_June 23rd._--This day is the fête of St. Jean. We were told that in
the evening there was to be a tree burnt down opposite the palace.
Accordingly Miss Wragge, brothers, and some of the servants, went to
see the ceremony. A tree was fixed up round which were tied bundles of
straw and faggots, and a guard stood round it. The son of the governor
of the château came out in great style, attended by several servants,
with a torch in his hand; he set fire to the tree, and the people tried
to pull away the faggots as they were burning. The whole party gave me
a very poor account of it. The servants said they could not think what
made the people make such a fuss about seeing a bit of a tree burnt
down.


FÊTE DIEU

_June 24th._--This was the _Fête Dieu_, a grand fête day in France.
Soldiers and priests were passing all the morning. There was a
procession at eight o'clock, which I did not see. At half-past eleven
we went to the Avenue de St. Cloud, where we were told the procession
would pass. There were a _very_ great number of people, amongst others
our porter's wife, who ran to get near the procession that the priests
might touch her baby. We stood near Madame Crosnier's school; the girls
(except Mademoiselle Rose, who was much as usual) were neatly dressed.
There were soldiers along each side of the avenue. We were amused at
several women who tried to run quickly across before the procession.
After we had waited for a long time the procession at last came:--1st,
three men on horseback; 2nd, a man in a red gown trimmed with fur, who
carried a large red flag--two boys held the strings; 3rd, a man in
purple who held a purple flag--two boys held the strings; 4th, a priest
with a red flag--two priests held the strings; 5th, pioneers and a band
of music; 6th, priests singing; 7th, a number of priests with books and
crosses, and a concierge; 8th, priests with censors full of incense,
and baskets full of flower-leaves;[30] 9th, several priests holding a
crimson velvet canopy, under which was the Bishop of Versailles, an
old man of eighty-four. A number of pages dressed in coats embroidered
with gold, fleurs-de-lys, etc., and a number of officers, closed the
procession. Along each side of the avenue there walked the boys and
girls who had taken their _première communion_, dressed as before.
The girls walked on one side and the boys on the other. One of the
girls was dressed in white silk and a blue and gold mantle, with long
hair over her face and back. We were told that this little girl was
dedicated to the Virgin; she was a very curious-looking figure. Several
nuns walked with the girls. After them, along each side, there walked a
number of priests in very brilliant dresses, gold, red, and green, etc.
Besides these there were priests in different parts of the procession.
Every now and then the procession stopped, and the priests that went
before the bishop turned round and threw incense and flowers, which
looked very pretty.

After the procession had passed, we went to see the _reposoir_ of the
Lyceum, which we were told was the prettiest. It is a building like
a temple. The doors were shut, but a very civil, gentlemanly-looking
person let us go in. The pillars were hung with wreaths of green, and
there were rows of trees in boxes up the middle, cut like those in
the gardens. The altar was a good deal ornamented: there were golden
candlesticks, artificial flowers, etc., on it. They were putting away
the things while we were there. The person who let us in said it was
customary to give away the flowers; we got two or three, which were
all that were left. Before the _reposoir_ there was grass laid for
the priests to kneel upon; we saw some women picking it up. There was
another _reposoir_ in the Avenue de Berri, and one near us at the end
of the Avenue de Sceaux, which was made slightly up, out of doors.
There were flower-pots on the sides, and a cross of lilies and roses on
the top. The children had dressed up little chapels on tables against
the wall, in the streets, with little figures, vials full of flowers,
coloured paper, etc. As people went by they came to beg 'pour la petite
chapelle.' One girl who came was quite a monster: she had no nose, and
two teeth that stuck out of her mouth like tusks. Out of some of the
windows in the streets were hung pieces of tapestry and old carpets.


_June 26th._--Catherine was now extremely ill; indeed, no person
seemed very well. What with the cold, and one thing and another, we
grew more dismal than ever. This day papa told us for our comfort (for
the first time) that as soon as Catherine was able we should all go
home. This piece of intelligence made us all happy for a short time,
as it was what we did not at all expect. I cannot tell what made me
dislike France so very much; one reason I think was that I raised my
expectations too high. I had heard so much of the fine climate, the
excellent fruit, and the lively people, that I was quite disappointed
at the cold weather, the bad fruit,[31] and the dull people. Besides,
I felt so far away from home that I grew quite unhappy. Nothing seemed
agreeable; I was tired of the gardens and the processions. My greatest
amusement was a little rose-tree that died soon after I got it. In the
morning when I got up, the only thing I wished was that the day was
over, and that we had a day less to stay at Versailles. The family that
had lived above us was now gone. Miss Ward and Miss Johnson--two Irish
ladies, with Mab, their French servant--now inhabited that part of
the house. They had come to France on account of being ill. They were
remarkably civil in sending down 'comed-milk,'[32] fruit, or anything
else they thought Catherine might like.


BAKER

_June 28th._--Carruthers saw our bread-baker standing at the street
door talking to some women, with _nothing_ on him but a _small_ apron.
The French do not seem to have _any_ idea what delicacy is.


LAVOIR

_June 29th._--We went to the _lavoir_ which is at the end of the Avenue
de Sceaux. It is covered at both sides, and the water is between. There
are boxes full of straw placed along for the women to kneel on. They
beat the clothes with wooden things of this shape. When we saw it this
time there were twenty women. One

[Illustration: shape]

good-natured, civil kind of woman took us to see her wash-house,
where she made lie. She told us a great deal about the _lavoir_. A
porter takes charge of it; the _blanchisseuses_ pay three, and the
_bourgeoises_ four sous each time, and so much for line for drying
their things upon. It closes at seven o'clock. The people go to the
porter and say, 'Place my boxes in such a place for so many,' and
then he arranges them accordingly. I took a sketch of the side of the
_lavoir_; the people seemed very much amused at it. One disagreeable
kind of woman called out, 'Mettez moi en peinture, elle n'est pas
gentille, je suis plus gentille qu'elle,' and then she held up her face
to show us how pretty she was.[33] She told us to draw a woman with a
barrow, and she laughed and said, 'Elle est blanchisseuse de torchons.'

[Illustration: LAVOIR]

In France they do the things up _very_ well, but in the washing they
spoil them very much. They put the clothes into some kind of liquid
which brings the colour out, and they beat them almost into holes. A
gown of the servants' was quite spoiled. Our washerwoman had a little
girl with green bead baskets in her ears.


DUCHESSE D'ORLÉANS' FUNERAL--MARRIAGE

_July 2nd._--We went to the Avenue de Paris to see the funeral of
the Duchesse d'Orléans, which was to come from Paris. It was close
weather; one heavy shower came on and obliged us to take shelter under
the trees. There was a person sitting on a stone who told us she was
reduced, and talked[34] a great deal. There were soldiers along both
sides of the avenue as far as the eye could reach. There were a great
many cuirassiers; when the sun shone on their steel armour it glittered
very much; two of their horses got loose and galloped all the way down.
We waited above two hours before the funeral came. First there came
three men on horseback, and after them several other men, then several
shabby post-chaises, and next the hearse, which was covered with black
velvet and silver. After that came guards, pages, people, carriages,
etc. The avenue was _crowded_ with people.

[Illustration: CUIRASSIER]

At twelve o'clock we went along with Miss Ward and Miss Johnson[35] to
Notre Dame to see the marriage of Marshal Soult's nephew to the _femme
de chambre_ of the Duchesse d'Angoulême. We sat very near the altar.
The church was excessively full; there were a great many English.
The bride was not at all pretty. She wore a white gauze gown trimmed
with flowers, over a white satin slip, and a veil fastened round her
head with a wreath of white roses. She was little, and had not a good
figure; the waist of her gown was very long and made very high in
front (which most of the French gowns are), which was not improving
to her figure. Marshal Soult was a vulgar-looking man, with a cross,
disagreeable countenance. His nephew was not ill-looking. There were
three bridesmaids, who looked old enough to be the bride's mother; they
were little and fat, and queerly dressed. The marriage ceremony was
chiefly done by the priest; he read and prayed by himself, and seemed
to have nothing to do with them. At last they each held a lighted
candle; the priest read some prayers to them; and one of the little
boys brought them a silver castle and a silver plate to kiss. Marshal
Soult seemed to look at it with great contempt. During one part of the
ceremony a curtain was held over them. While the ceremony was going on
we saw the priest do something that appeared very irreverent. After he
had been praying on the steps of the altar, no sooner had he risen than
he spit on them: we afterwards saw him dancing across the vestry. After
the ceremony there was a collection of money. Miss Ward told us only to
give a sous or two; we observed the bridegroom thought he had given too
much, as he took out of the plate what he had at first given, and put
in a smaller sum.

After we returned from the church there was a great deal of rain,
thunder and lightning.


PALACE ROOMS--TRIANONS

_July 3rd._--A very hot day. We went along with uncle Lancaster to see
the inside of the palace. The first part we were shown into was the
chapel. It is extremely beautiful and magnificent. We looked at it over
the railing, which is marble and gold; the ceiling is painted, and
the organ (though silver) is very light and pretty. We next entered
the Salon d'Hercule. It is 64 feet long and 54 broad. It is entirely
composed of beautiful marble; there is a great deal of painting and
gold about the ceiling. The Salle de l'Attendance, Salle de Vénus,
Salle de Diane, Salle de Mars, Salle de Mercure, etc., are all much
alike, decorated with painting, gold, and marble. After passing through
these splendid apartments several other large rooms appeared quite
small. The King's library is not fine, nor the bedrooms of the King
and Queen. There are some very curious glass closets in which one sees
oneself reflected at the top, the bottom, and all sides, apparently
without end. The Œil de Bœuf is a long room, but not very splendid. In
it is a picture of Louis XIV. surrounded by his family; at the end is
a round window like an ox's eye. There is a very plain dining-room,
white, with small paintings, which, though _nothing_ like the other
rooms, I liked very much; it was quite a relief to my eyes after so
much splendour. The Salle de la Guerre is a good deal painted and gilt;
there are some very good imitations of bronze. From this you enter the
Grande Galerie, which is 222 feet long, 32 broad, and 40 high. There
are seventeen large windows, and as many mirrors opposite to them.
These are separated by pillars of marble. On the ceiling is painted, in
nine large pictures and eighteen small ones, the history of Louis XIV.
From the windows of this gallery you have a good view of the gardens.
When we were there they were repairing part of it. We passed from this
to the Salon de la Paix and several other apartments. The Salle de
l'Opéra is very large, and I dare say when it is lighted up it would
look very fine; but I thought it far the least pretty of any of the
rooms; it looked gone to ruin. The staircase in the palace is marble.
The only piece of furniture in the whole palace is a small clock. I
don't think I ever saw anything so unlike the residence of a king:
there appears to be nothing but gold, marble, glass, and paintings. A
man shows the rooms, to whom you give something; both times I was there
it was full of people.

We went through the gardens to the Grand Trianon. The rooms are all
on one floor. They look very different to the rooms of the other
palace, but amusing in their way. We waited in a hall for the person
to conduct us through the other apartments. In one of the rooms there
is a beautiful inlaid table, round which are represented the signs of
the zodiac; it was made by a pupil of Sicard who was deaf and dumb.
The beds have plumes of white feathers at the top; they reminded us
of hearses. Some of the chairs are very pretty tapestry worked in
lilies, roses, and birds. There are also several tapestry pictures.
There is a long gallery between the windows, in which there are a great
many models of ships. There are also several statues and some curious
little agate ornaments in it. In one room there is a beautiful green
malachite-of-copper basin, and slabs of the same, given by the Emperor
of Russia to Maria Louisa; the man who showed us the rooms did not seem
to like to speak about it. In the same room there were some common,
vulgar tongs, such as one would not see in a kitchen. There were gold
arrows on the chimney-piece for lights, and very pretty lustres. I
think the palace is a great deal more _amusing_ than the other. After
we had been through the rooms we got some cider and cakes at the place
where we left our umbrellas. We did not see the gardens, which are said
to be pretty.

When we were rested we went to the Petit Trianon. There is nothing
at all to see in the rooms; it is like any small private house. The
Queen's bed is gold muslin, and the walls of the room are covered
with blue silk. The gardens are remarkably pretty; they are made
in imitation of English gardens, designed by the unfortunate Marie
Antoinette, and have none of the stiffness and formality of the other
French gardens. At one part of the garden there is the figure of a
Chinese holding an umbrella; it ought all to turn round like a swing.
Near that is a small theatre, or rather music-room. There are little
streams in different parts of the gardens, an artificial river, and
a pond. After you cross a bridge with rocks at the sides, you enter
a dark grotto, from which you go out by a staircase. There is a
music-room and a temple and a tower; the man _told_ us that the late
Queen used to get on the top of the tower and sing. The pond scenery
makes quite a pretty landscape; several willows overhang it, and three
or four swans were swimming in it; at one side there is a farm-house, a
dairy, and a mill. We were told that the Queen used sometimes to dress
herself up like an English farmer's wife, and call herself Mrs. Browne;
she used to stay at the farm, and her attendants used to dress up as
her servants.

We returned home very much tired with the heat; in the evening there
was rain, thunder and lightning.


MADAME VERNIER

_July 6th._--As our house was very cold, and the stone floors were
thought to be bad for Catherine, we took a house in the Rue Reservoir,
which we this day went to; before we went, however, we had quite a
battle with Madame Vernier. We warned her a fortnight before that we
were going to quit the house; but it was at five in the afternoon,
and she said we ought to have given her warning before twelve; she
therefore charged us for another month. As mamma knew this was
an imposition she was determined not to pay it. She sent for the
proprietor of the house (who was very civil), and also for Madame
Vernier. The proprietor talked to her a long time, but she would
take no less; he then wanted Miss Wragge to go with her to the _juge
de paix_, which of course she did not do. Madame Vernier had been a
camp-follower: she was a great, fat woman with a voice like a man's. We
heard of several tricks that she had played the English; she said that
the French had payed plenty of contributions, and she was determined
that the English should make up for it. Once when some people would
not pay her what she asked for, she went round the house and picked
out every scratch and hole, saying a franc for this, and so much for
that, till she made up the sum she wanted. Another time she charged an
unreasonable price to some people who were dining there (her husband
was a _restaurateur_), and on their refusing to pay it she locked the
gates and threatened to detain their trunks. As the gentleman was very
lame, he was glad to pay what she required and get off, though they
had bargained before for dinner at so much less per head! When mamma
knew what a woman she was she determined not to pay her for the next
month. Accordingly she sent for papa, who was at Paris, and papa and
Dr. Murdoch (who had resided long in France and spoke French perfectly)
went along with Madame Vernier to the _juge de paix_, who said she
was wrong, and in case of her detaining our trunks gave papa the name
of a _huissier_. Madame Vernier told the _juge de paix_ that papa had
attempted to strangle her, to which he replied that she looked more
likely to strangle one of the _garde de corps_. She told him that he
knew nothing at all about it, and came away in a great passion. She
then got a relation of hers who was a lawyer's clerk (or something of
the kind), and she brought him upstairs to convince us. The proprietor
tried to persuade her to take the money; she, however, refused it; but
when she found papa was determined not to give any more they all went
downstairs, and after consulting a little while, she sent up to say she
would take the money. After this contest she was, like a tamed lion,
and was quite civil. We went to our house in the Rue Reservoir, which
we did not find quite so comfortable as we had expected.

[Illustration: MADAME VERNIER]


NEW HOUSE

_July 7th._--Our new house was nearly opposite the theatre, which on a
Sunday, particularly, was crowded with people; every Sunday evening a
number of drunken people passed our windows; one Sunday we counted six
close together.[36] Our servants went one day to the play, but it was
so dirty that it made them quite sick. Near our house was a priests'
school; we used to hear the boys singing a great part of the day and
sometimes in the night. Behind our house there was a small garden with
very little in it. When mamma went to see the house two of the rooms
were carpeted, and everything was very comfortable. Although Monsieur
Grincourt had several days to prepare it, when we came to our new
house the carpets were taken up, the curtains were taken off some of
the beds, and everything was uncomfortable. The fireplaces were full
of every kind of rubbish. There were not enough plates, glasses, etc.
And we were reduced to many curious expedients. The French are very
dilatory about bringing things. We saw they did not intend to give us
back our carpets, as the next day they sent a frotteur[37] to clean the
floors; however, as we had taken the house with a carpet, we told them
to bring it, and we used to send Nannette to scold every day till at
last we got all we wanted. They also brought quilts for the beds, but
they gave great charges that they were to be taken off at night. We
got two tea-kettles which were a most extraordinary shape. The French
make some little things very nicely, and other common things extremely
awkwardly. There was a bath in the house, and the room adjoining it was
remarkably damp; a great many toad-stools grew in the closet; there
was also an ants' nest below the floor. The porter's wife was _much_
younger than the one in our other house; her husband lived at Paris;
she had one son of eleven or twelve, a very rude boy. Different people
lived above us, latterly a Mr. and Mrs. Spurrier. Mr. Spurrier was
determined his French servants should do like English servants; if he
succeeded, I think he did more than any person did before him.


SUNDAY

_July 8th._--The lady above stairs played the whole day without ceasing
on the harp; the boys at the priests' school made more noise than usual
in their playground; numbers of people were going to a village fête; a
great many people passed by on their way to the theatre, among whom was
Mademoiselle Croissé; we counted six drunken people; shops were open as
usual, and people going about their work as on any other day. On Sunday
Madame Crosnier's girls spent the day in working and dancing.


VILLAGE FÊTE

_July 9th._--We went in a carriage to see the village fête of
Louvécienne. Little Miss Foaker went with us. It was a fine evening.
Louvécienne, or Lucien, is above four miles from Versailles; it is
very pretty about the village. There were lamps hung across the trees,
and seats placed round on the ground where they danced. Three fiddlers
were stuck up in a kind of orchestra, and they played a very dull tune
extremely badly. I was very much disappointed in the dancing: it was
more like a funeral than a dance. The figure was a quadrille. They
walked it all till they came to the setting, which they danced in their
way, which was almost duller than the walking. All the time they were
dancing their faces were as grave as judges: they behaved as if it was
a lesson they wished to be done with; as soon as the dance was done
they laughed, pulled each other round, and ran off to buy a sweetmeat
at one of the booths; then they came back as grave as possible. One of
the nicest girls was dressed in a white gown, pink apron, green shoes,
and a gold chain; there was one very impudent, disagreeable, vulgar
woman, dressed in blue cotton. Some were in white, and some had on red
petticoats, high caps, gold chains, etc. There were booths, stalls,
whirligigs, roundabouts, etc., like an English fair. We saw an old man
and woman of sixty or seventy riding in a roundabout. At the other end,
near some trees, there was a party of ladies and gentlemen; they danced
much like the peasants, in some respects worse--one or two of them,
however, danced tolerably well. This party had rather better music, but
very dull. As we went away they were beginning to light the lamps. It
looked very pretty to see the people under the trees, but the dancing
nearly put one to sleep, and the music was like a funeral dirge. They
say that the French like dancing better than anything, and we heard it
very much admired. For my part, I think it is neither graceful, nor
pretty, nor merry.

[Illustration: VILLAGE FÊTE]


MUSEUM

_Tuesday, July 10th._--We went up to Paris at nine o'clock to see the
museum; it was a fine morning, but rather cold. It is a very pretty
drive; the country is beautiful about the Seine. There were a great
many bluebottles and scarlet poppies in the corn, more than I ever saw
in England; the fields looked like a sheet of blue and red. In Paris
they sell pretty wreaths of bluebottles. We met a cart guarded by
eight soldiers, with nothing in it but old chairs and broken tables.
We arrived at Paris at twelve o'clock, and went to two flower-shops,
where were beautiful artificial flowers. The carnations were scented.
They had not many wreaths: the flowers that brides wear are the buds
of orange flowers. We bought several single flowers, jessamine, roses,
camilla,[38] japonica, etc. From this we all went to the cabinet
d'Histoire Naturelle. We remarked the floating baths on the Seine. When
we reached the Jardin des Plantes the museum was not open, so we walked
in the garden till three o'clock, when the doors are opened. There was
quite a crowd of people of all ranks. I think it is wonderful that the
things are not hurt, as the people press close to the glasses. We went
to the upper gallery first, that we might have more time to examine
it. Several rooms open one into the other. There were soldiers with
swords in their hands, walking up and down. We had not time to look at
everything; we only skimmed over the things. The first rooms contain
above two hundred monkeys; we scarcely looked at them at all. In this
museum there seems to be every kind of creature. There is a great
quantity of bats of all sizes; a rat with a young one on its back;
some very small mice, marmottes, opossums, armadillos, lions, tigers,
panthers, etc.; a horse; most beautiful little deer, some very small;
a chevrotin; cats and dogs. These were all in _glass cases_ round the
room. In the middle of the room there were two enormous elephants, a
rhinoceros, etc., a hippopotamus, which is a frightful-looking creature
with an immense mouth. On the top of the cases there is a morse. In
the middle of the next room there is a whale, a wild ox, a buffalo,
and a cameleopard which almost touched the top of the room. There was
the skin of a snake, like a trunk of a tree, near the top of the room.
The animals in the middle of the room were not in cases. There was a
great variety of springboks, sjrisboks, etc., in this room, and also
porcupines, foxes, and a variety of other animals.

The most beautiful and amusing room was that in which the birds were.
There were a great many owls; pink spoonbills, scarlet flamingoes,
toucans, parrots of every colour, very pretty kingfishers, penguins,
cassowarys, peacocks and hens; there was one petrified ibis. The most
beautiful were the humming-birds; their colours were quite dazzling:
some were very small, and others larger. There was one beautiful
forked-tailed humming-bird: its throat was of the most brilliant green,
and its breast amethyst purple; the rest of its body was a shining
black. The topaz humming-bird is also very pretty; it has a yellow
breast and a red topping. The red-throated humming-bird is also pretty,
but not so brilliant as my favourite fork-tail. One of the larger
humming-birds is all bright black, like velvet, except the neck, which
is the colour of an emerald. No colours could express the brightness
of their plumage. There were several nests which were whitish. In the
same case with the humming-birds there were some scarlet creepers,
very bright and pretty, and one or two blue creepers which were like
precious stones. We examined this case longer than any other.

There was a glass case up the middle of the room in which were
lobsters, corals, shells, sponges, etc. In one part all the insects
were arranged. The butterflies were the most beautiful things I ever
saw. There was one very large blue one that dazzled my eyes to look
at; another black and bluish lilac; and the Amboyna butterfly, an
immense green and black one, with most brilliant colours and shining
like velvet. There were several small ones striped yellow and black;
one very beautiful small scarlet and purple one; several very large
greyish butterflies or moths which had small clear spots in their
wings like glass; there were two or three smallish butterflies marked
with every colour like marble. The large butterflies were excessively
beautiful. There were several English ones beside them that looked
quite dull and ugly. There were a great many large moths; one grey and
a great deal marked was even bigger than the green butterfly; there was
another beautiful large grey moth with purple eyes in its under wings.
Besides the butterflies there were several other insects: dragon-flies,
the colours of which were quite gone; enormous spiders; a great
variety of bees; an ant lion at the bottom of a small pit; very large
caterpillars; and a great many other insects.

We then went to the lower gallery, which is not so amusing; but there
are some curious fishes, a crocodile, very pretty marbles, a large
piece of gold ore, and a great variety of stones, etc. Instead of real
precious stones there were only imitations in glass, which looked very
shabby. I was very sorry to leave the museum; it was the most amusing
and beautiful thing in France. It closes at five o'clock. After we had
left it we returned to Versailles.


DUCHESSE DE BERRI--DUCHESSE D'ANGOULÊME

_July 15th._--Hearing a great deal of noise amongst the boys in the
priests' school, we enquired what was the matter, and were told that it
was the Duchesse d'Angoulême and the Duchesse de Berri come to visit
the priests' school. We went out to see them, and after waiting a very
long time for them, they at last came out, got into an open carriage,
and drove away very quickly. There were a lady and a gentleman in the
carriage with them, and several soldiers on horseback. There were a
great many priests and boys looking out of the windows. Neither the
Duchesse d'Angoulême nor the Duchesse de Berri are pretty: the Duchesse
de Berri has very red eyes. Before this we had heard of the death of
Buonaparte. A man used to go about the streets with a bundle of papers,
crying, 'Voici les dernières paroles, et la confession importante que
faisoit Napoléon Buonaparte avant de mourir.' We were told that this
was a famous spy. It was hot weather for two or three days, and every
person watered before their doors.


ENGLISH ROBBERS

_July 17th._--This evening we had just returned from walking in the
gardens when we were told by the servants that three English robbers
had been just then taken up. There were two men and a woman, who had
robbed some English at an hotel in Paris of a great deal of money,
and gone off with it; they were, however, all stopped and taken up
at Versailles. We heard of another Englishman that had swindled. An
English lady told us that at Boulogne there were quantities of English
who came over in debt, and that a prison there was so full of English
that it was called the British Hotel.


HAYFIELD--MUSIC--CHILD

_July 18th._--This (and several other) evenings we walked to the
hayfield near the Trianons. There were a great many grasshoppers and
brown butterflies (meadow arguses) flying out of the haycocks. We sat
down on the hay, and Miss Wragge got a wisp of hay round her leg, which
she took for a snake; this amused the people very much. Near here we
used to see some little pensions of poor children going out to walk.
At the gate of the Trianons we saw a little child of about three years
old standing. It came up to us with a straw in its hand, which it held
like a soldier; it then put it to our faces and tickled them. We asked
it where it lived; it said 'là-bas.' Miss Wragge gave it a sou. The
French children have a very forward manner; they come up to strangers
and talk quite at their ease. We returned by the gardens. There was
now a band of music (every Wednesday and Friday) in the King's garden,
or the Tapis-vert. There were a great many flowers out in the King's
garden: many different sorts of columbine, honeysuckle, syringas, and
roses on sticks. The trees in the garden (Hartwell) are not cut like
those in the rest of the garden, but are suffered to grow naturally.
The music was not pretty; the players seemed very much afraid of tiring
themselves, as they rested more than half the time. While the music
played to-day, the Tapis-vert was crowded with people. We observed
one little boy, who did not look more than three or four years old,
with light curly hair and rosy cheeks; he had a kind of little bag
before him, in which were different sweetmeats--dogs, lambs, etc. He
ran to every person and begged them to buy; his little sweetmeats were
a sou apiece. At first we thought it looked very pretty to see the
little fellow selling the things, but we soon discovered that he was
accompanied by a very disagreeable woman, and as the child followed and
plagued every one it was quite unpleasant. As we returned through the
gardens we saw some watering-pots--great, awkward, copper things--which
we drew on our nails. This was a fine day.

[Illustration:

1. PROCESSION AT THE PREMIÈRE COMMUNION

2. AND 3. PROCESSIONS AT THE FÊTE DIEU

4. _REPOSOIR_ IN THE AVENUE SCEAUX

5. ONE OF THE CHILDREN'S LITTLE 'PETITES CHAPELLES'

6. A PASSING SOLDIER IN THE STREET

7. THE TROUBLESOME BOY IN THE KING'S GARDEN]


MONSIEUR SOUPÉ

_July 20th._--Monsieur Soupé (from whom we got our wine) was the King's
wine-merchant. He told us that there were 500 bottles of wine a day
drunk in the King's house, and that the bills are settled every night;
and that the King breakfasts at twelve o'clock on eggs and tea. He
told us also that he had seen Buonaparte dine, and that he never took
longer than eleven minutes. In the beginning of Louis XVI.'s reign 1300
bottles a day were drunk.


SHEPHERD

_July 21st._--This evening (being fine) we walked past the Trianons.
We met a shepherd with a flock of Andalusian sheep, and two fine dogs
with pieces of wood hung to their necks. He had a crook in his hand,
and a bag with a bottle in it by his side; one end of his crook was
brass, and at the other there was a kind of little spade. We stopped
to talk with the shepherd. Papa asked him what the dogs' names were;
he answered 'Petit et Beau-Rouge.' The wood was round their necks so
that he might know them. He said that he used the crook to catch the
sheep by their legs. He told us that the use of the spade was to punish
his dogs, and to explain what he meant, he dug up a piece of earth and
threw it at them. Papa asked what was in his bottle. 'Méchant cidre,'
he answered. Papa gave him a franc to fill the bottle.


BAL CHAMPÊTRE

_July 26th._--We drove out in the carriage this afternoon with
Catherine, who was getting better, and who frequently drove out. We
went round by the Trianons; in the forest we saw some pretty roebucks,
which bounded through the wood. We passed a field full of lilac
poppies. In returning we stopped at the Boulevard de St. Antoine, where
there was a _bal champêtre_. There were lamps hung on the trees. The
music was very dull. We saw them dance two quadrilles. One _garde du
corps_ danced in a most extraordinary manner: he jumped and hopped,
and kicked and bounced, as if he had learned off a bear at the North
Pole. His partner, a little girl of ten or eleven years old, danced
very well. One lady in a pink silk bonnet seemed as if she had learned
in the French style, but wanted to dance lighter, for she walked two
or three steps and then jumped up. They all kept bad time, walked and
hopped. The three Miss Williams and their father were there. In the
middle of their dance a heavy shower of rain came on; everybody ran
into a house or went home. We saw the Miss Williams standing under a
tree, like three white graces, half-way home.


TOADSTOOLS, ETC.

_July 28th._--This was an excessively rainy day; we found ten
toadstools in Catherine's room. There were several people dining here;
there were fires in the rooms, which everybody was glad to get near. It
was wet, disagreeable weather. We were all waiting eagerly to go home;
the days seemed like weeks. To make them appear shorter, I made a list
of all the days till the time we were to go home, and I scratched out
one each day. This day was Nannette's fête; she went to a Dutch frow (a
German woman), who gave her a nosegay.


BELLE VUE

_July 29th._--We drove out this evening to Belle Vue. It was a fine
evening. We saw a man standing before his door watering some boxes full
of mushrooms. At Belle Vue we went through a house where we had a very
fine view of Paris, the Seine and St. Cloud. We looked at a vineyard;
there were no grapes on the vines there. We heard that the bad season
had injured them.[39]


PRIESTS WITH HOST--CORPSE, ETC.

_July 30th._--As we were walking out, we saw some priests carrying the
host to a sick person across the street. A boy in red and white walked
first, carrying a lantern on the top of a stick; next went another boy
carrying a cross. After him two men in scarlet holding a little red
canopy over the priest who carried the host. The sick man died next
day. The servants saw the body laid out in the _porte cochère_ with a
vessel of holy water and a ladle beside it; every person that went past
took a ladle full of holy water and sprinkled the corpse with it.


VILLE D'AVRY

_August 4th._--We drove out this evening to Ville d'Avry. This drive
is the prettiest I saw about Versailles; there are woody banks and
paths, more like England. It was late when we reached the village,
but there was a clear, bright moon; and a woody hill with a house on
the top, looked exceedingly pretty in the moonlight. There was also a
house under a woody bank covered with vines; and a man was standing on
a ladder pruning them. This place is beautiful; more like what I had
imagined France. We got out of the carriage to see it plainer.


KING AND WATERS

_August 6th._--We were told this morning that the King and Prince
Leopold were expected at Versailles. Quantities of troops passed our
windows in their way to the Avenue Trianon, where the King was to
review them. There were some La Roche Jacquellines on black horses.
At about twelve o'clock we went (along with Mr. and Mrs. Spurrier) to
Neptune's Bath, near which the King was to pass. The women charged a
franc apiece for our chairs. There were rows of soldiers behind the
trees. There was a great quantity of people around Neptune's Bath;
there seemed to be nearly all Versailles.[40]

There were several carriages waiting for the King in case it should
rain, etc.; one of them was gold and red, very gaudy-looking. A
carriage came on first before the King. When the King came, one needed
four eyes: to look at the King on one side and round to Neptune's Bath
at the other, for as soon as ever he came the waters began to play
like fairy-work. The water shot out of each vase, Neptune's horses
spouted, and the whole water seemed covered with spouts and cascades.
In the first open carriage was the King, the Duchess d'Angoulême,
Monsieur, and the Duchess de Berri. Prince Leopold did not come.
Several carriages followed with attendants. The King is a _very_ fat,
contented-looking man. As soon as the carriages had passed the waters
stopped. It was an extremely pretty sight. The King went on to the
Trianons and stayed there for a long while. When he returned the waters
played again. They came back with large bunches of flowers in each
carriage. We saw great numbers of the soldiers returning. Although the
waters played for so short a time, some of the pipes burst. It costs
1200 francs every time the great waters play. The _restaurateurs_ make
a great deal of money when they play, as it brings numbers of people
from Paris. About a week before this the _restaurateurs_ caused it to
be put in the newspapers that the great waters were to play; and this
brought a great many people, who found to their disappointment that it
was all false.

[Illustration: GARDE ROYALE. INFANTERIE CHASSEUR, Ier RÉGIMENT]


SÈVRE

_August 7th._--A very honest man with a _voiture_ was to come for
us from Abbeville, and then we were to go home. We expected him on
Thursday, but to our great joy he came to-day, two days sooner than
was expected. The whole house was in confusion; I was so delighted
that I hardly knew what to do. We set off directly to see the china
manufactory at Sèvre. The day was very fine, and we had a most pleasant
ride. The rooms in which the china was were up a long pair of stairs.
In the first room there was nothing but plain white china: the plates
are a franc apiece. There were beautiful large painted vases, some
with landscapes on them, some purple, and others brown. Very pretty
white baskets of flowers; three little children under lace veils made
of white biscuit china. Curious-shaped salt-cellars; an inkstand the
shape of a boat, etc.; several pictures, one of the King, the Duchesse
d'Angoulême, Sappho, etc.; beautiful cups with humming-birds painted
on them; a set of plates with flowers, jonquils, polyanthuses, etc.,
on them; another set with roses, and another with vegetables, with
their names marked in gold; Bacchus and Ceres in a car drawn by bulls
ornamented with wreaths of gold flowers--the figures are white; a
set of plates with Eastern pictures on them, and another with birds
beautifully painted. There are several very large vases: one with a
purple ground that cost 27,000 francs. There is a large china table on
which Minerva is represented presenting the Louvre and other galleries
to France. Another table, on which there are different palaces, cost
35,000 francs. There were also some very pretty white ornaments, with
cones on the top and baskets of grapes about them. On one plate there
is a view of Windsor, and on another General ---- drowning in a river
in Egypt.

[Illustration:

1. THE SHEPHERD OF THE ANDALUSIAN SHEEP

2. PRIESTS CARRYING THE HOST TO SICK PEOPLE

3. DANCING UPON STILTS

4. BEGGAR WOMAN IN A BOWER OF DEAD LEAVES

5. THE VIRGIN IN THE CHURCH OF ST. REMIS]

The man told us that china was much cheaper than formerly. There was
a transparency in the window; and some round pieces of glass on which
were feathers, flowers, sea-weeds, etc., made in the shape of birds.
From Sèvres we drove to St. Cloud. We could not go in front of the
palace because the King was there. I did not think it pretty; there
were a number of stalls and shops near it which did not look well.
There were a great many guards. We returned home by Ville Daure, a very
pretty drive. As soon as we got home the whole house was in a bustle,
as we were to set off next morning. We had shoes to buy, calls to make,
bills to pay, clothes to get from the washerwoman's, masters to pay,
gowns to get from Mademoiselle Bouillet, and things to pack up. In the
midst of all this bustle, Nannette, who had gone up to Paris, had not
returned when she promised, so we left Versailles without her knowing
it. We tasted some green almonds at dessert, which were tasteless and
insipid. The servants packed till two o'clock in the morning; they got
the clothes from the wash at twelve at night. All was confusion, but
every person was merry. It was the happiest day we spent in France. I
went to bed with delight, happy to think it was the last night I should
sleep at Versailles.


WEDNESDAY

_August 8th, 1821._--We had a cool but pleasant day to begin our
journey. Miss Wragge did not get her gown from Mademoiselle Bouillet
till we were all in the carriage, and she declared she would not go
without it, and told the man to drive off. At last after _great_
bustling we set off at eleven o'clock; papa, mamma, Catherine and
Caroline went before in the carriage, the rest of us went in the
_voiture_. I never felt so little regret at leaving a place. I looked
with joy at the houses and people, glad to think I should see them no
more. We sang most part of the way. At a distance we saw the convent of
St. Cyr. We passed the very long, fine aqueduct of Marli, and a small
one further on. About here it was pretty country; there were a good
many vineyards and orchards in corn. We had a view of Mount Calvary;
near which we saw a set of gypsies by the side of the road. We then
saw the Seine running through a pretty valley; and numerous vineyards
continued to St. Germains, about which the country is pretty and well
wooded. We stopped for some time at Poissy while the man rested his
horses. The house was like a public-house, but the mistress was a civil
little woman. There was a cloth on the table on which was some Gruyère
cheese, a loaf of bread and some pears; we took the pears, which were
very good: she charged a franc. She told us that an English lady had
been staying there a month. There was a pretty view out of the window.
We walked along beside the river, and got a nice view from the bridge;
there were a number of washer-women beating their clothes, and the
water was white with soap-suds. After we had left Poissy we saw several
horses carrying corn; their backs being hung with sheaves in a very
curious manner. The corn about here did not look good. There was a good
deal of asparagus; in some places there were alternate rows of corn and
asparagus. The man who drove us sang most of the time, and altered his
voice: he had been in England, and he said that when he came back to
France he could not persuade the people that in England it took only
one man to shoe a horse. He had an English dog with him, which he said
understood English, French, and Spanish. The name of the man was Jean
de Grange. Here the country was not so pretty, as there are no hedges;
the patches of corn and grass looked just like ribbons, particularly on
the side of a hill. We reached Mantes in the evening. After crossing
two bridges we saw a curious old church. The river looked full of soap;
I think the water must be very unwholesome considering the quantity of
soap which goes into it. We went to Hôtel du Grand Cerf. The floor of
the parlour was boarded, and there were two vases full of artificial
flowers; the people of the inn were civil. Two of our beds were in the
parlour, from which they were divided by doors that shut like a closet.


_August 9th._--We set off at a quarter to six. There were a few
vineyards, but the country was not pretty as far as Châlons. The banks
of the Seine are quite lovely, and the river looks well here, as there
are several islands in it. We saw a boat full of cattle going across
the river. There are a good many houses and vineyards on the banks.
Further on there were rows of walnut and plum trees by the roadside,
which looked very pretty. The corn looked fine, but very much laid.
There were not any animals, except here and there a skinny cow tethered
by the roadside. We breakfasted at Vernon. The room we were in was very
shabby. In one corner of a room we passed through there was a queer
jug--a boy sitting across a barrel. They brought us in an odd-looking
teapot; the water was smoked, as the tea-kettle had no lid, and the tea
tasted like herbs and water; the milk too was thymy, the butter bad,
and the bread sour. We had been told that in this part of the country
chickens were _fourpence_ a pair; the woman here told us that they were
_three francs_ and a half. It was at Vernon we saw a man sitting at the
door eating a raw artichoke and oil. After leaving Vernon there came on
a heavy shower of rain. We saw several men mowing the corn. When it was
fair, we got out at a cottage to gather some plums; the man shook the
tree, and we picked up those that fell; we gave him half a franc, with
which he seemed satisfied. We walked up a hill where we saw several
butterflies; some with black and yellow striped upper wings, and under
wings the colour of a dead leaf. There were rows of apple and pear
trees; we picked up a few apples and pears which were not ripe; the
apples were like alum and the pears like stone. The country was here
much prettier: it was more like England; we even saw a few flocks of
sheep, but they did not seem to get much: in one place they were eating
the earth. As we were walking up the hill an old woman came to beg;
the driver offered her a card of an inn, which he told her was a Bank
of England note: she did not, however, take it, but turned away. There
were several crucifixes in the villages and at the side of the road.
The women about here had generally short petticoats, and _very_ high
caps. The babies were wrapped up in swaddling-clothes, like mummies. We
stopt at Louviers. The inn was very poor and shabby. The mistress had
on a curious cap with long muslin lappets. While dinner was preparing
we walked through the town. We went into a curious old cathedral, where
were several figures with candles burning before them, and some Virgins
dressed with little veils, artificial flowers, etc. There were a great
many people kneeling down and repeating prayers. We went into a shop
to look for some caps, but they asked a great deal for the commonest,
so we did not buy them. The women here all wore the high caps. There
was one little boy with long flaxen hair, and the lady who was with him
took off his velvet cap to shew us his hair. On our way home we saw
the same man and boys dancing upon stilts that I had seen at Paris:
there was a great crowd round them, and a woman went about collecting
money, saying, 'Encouragez la petite famille.' When we reached the inn
dinner had been ready some time. As soon as we had dined we continued
our journey. We passed Pont Large in going out of the town. The country
was beautiful, and we had another view of the Seine; they were making
hay on one of the islands. Our eyes were quite refreshed by seeing two
or three green fields _hedged_ in, with a few cows feeding in them.
Certainly if any person wished to have a pleasant impression of France
they ought to come this way: it is beyond comparison prettier than the
Calais road; the banks of the Seine are so beautiful. Near Rouen there
is a chalk rock and several caverns with people living in them; and we
had another beautiful view of the river. It was dark when we reached
Rouen. It is an old, ugly town, but there appeared to be some good
shops. We stopped at the Custom-house (there were a number of ships
near it): they did not examine our trunks, but sent a person on to
the inn with us. We went to the Hôtel de Normandie, which was all in
confusion; the father of the people there was _just_ dead: their mother
had been dead two years. When papa and mamma asked what we could have
for dinner, they said anything; after it was ordered, however, they
brought in only very few of the things and said the table d'hôte had
eaten it all: and then they brought in two raw pigeons and asked if we
would like to have them dressed. One of the hotel servants had been at
Brighton, and she said she was very sorry to leave England, and was
going to try to get there again. She spoke English tolerably.

[Illustration: LOUVIERS WOMAN]


_August 10th._--Before breakfast we went to see the Church of St.
Ouen, where there is a beautiful wheel-window over the organ. One of
the churches here is like a coach-house. We set off again at nine. The
streets we passed through were extremely narrow and dirty, and the
town looked very busy, particularly about the shipping and river.[41]
We had a fine view of a hill just out of the town. There were a few
hedges here. We saw a coffin covered with black and white velvet on
some chairs before a door, with several candles burning round it, and
a procession of priests and boys with crucifixes at a distance. As
we were walking up a hill we saw an old beggar woman sitting by the
roadside in a bower of dead leaves: her petticoat was covered with
patches of all colours; she begged of us as we went past. We also saw
two very curious figures with gilt caps and red cloaks. We did not
see _near_ so many beggars this way as we did on the Calais road. We
stopped at Tôtes, where we dined. Before dinner we walked out past a
long building; we asked some women what it was: they told us it was a
corn-market, which belonged to Madame D'Ossonval _seigneur du village_.
We got sugared peas, etc., for dinner. After Tôtes, the country was
pretty: there were hedges like England. A good many of the people
here (especially the old women) wore ugly cotton caps and ribbons and
crosses. We walked up a hill near Dieppe. I almost strained my eyes to
see the sea; it was what I had wished to see for a long time; at last,
when we had reached the top of a hill, we had a view of the sea and of
Dieppe. We went to Taylor's English hotel. Out of the window of the
sitting-room you look upon the ships: it is close to the harbour. This
day we saw none of the curious caps we had heard about.

[Illustration: OLD WOMAN WITH A COTTON CAP]


_August 11th._--After breakfast we went into the market, where we saw
quite as curious figures as we had expected. Some of the caps had
lappets like butterflies' wings, and large bunches of hair turned up
behind. We saw some of the hair hanging at a shop-door: it was coarse
like horse-hair. A number of the people were dressed in black. We saw
three women, like a mother and her daughters, coming in to market
with baskets on their arms. They had on black gowns, aprons, and
handkerchiefs; caps, the lappets of which blew out with the wind and
showed a great bunch of hair; and gold ornaments about their necks.
There was one woman selling fruit who had on a very curious cap: the
frame was made of pasteboard, and the front of it covered with gold,
silver, spangles, tinsel, etc.; round the top there was a long piece of
muslin which hung almost to the ground. The women we saw in the market
had their lappets pinned up. Some of the old women had on cotton caps.
We passed several shops (in our way to the market) full of little ivory
ships and figures beautifully cut. We walked up to the castle, from
which we saw the whole of the town. We afterwards went on the cliffs
on the outside of the castle, from which we had a view of the sea with
several boats on it. A woman came and spoke to us about a house which
she had to let; she spoke very bad French: she called _cinquante_
'_shinquante_.' I could hardly understand the Dieppe people; they spoke
so much through their noses.[42] We wanted to buy a cap and a pair
of sabots. We went into two or three shops before we could get a cap
to our mind; we at last got a leno cap and an under cap to wear with
it, such as the women in black wore, which was the most common kind.
They told us that a gilt cap when new cost 20 francs. Our sabots cost
sixpence: the old woman thought we intended to wear them, and said we
ought to have a nicer kind. We asked several people the way to the
Church of St. Remi: the people of Dieppe seemed to have a disagreeable
manner. The Church of St. Remi is not beautiful. In one of the little
chapels there was a small figure of the Virgin Mary with a child in
her arms; her petticoats were painted scarlet, and she had on a lace
veil, a crown, and a bunch of flowers in her hand. We went to see the
Church of St. Jacques. There is a very pretty purple wheel-window over
the organ; and in a kind of recess in the wall there were a great many
figures holding a sheet covered with real flowers: before which there
were twenty-nine candles burning; several people came and stuck in a
candle. We looked into several of the little chapels: in one there was
a virgin, in another a ship, in another some filigree work in frames.
We dined at the table d'hôte. There were five English gentlemen. We
could not sail this evening, as the wind blew into the harbour; so
we went to buy pears to take in the ship next day. While we were
buying the pears we observed a number of children standing about and
looking at the fruit. Papa bought some currants and held them out to
the children, upon which they all ran away; papa and the woman told
them that the currants were for them, but they cried and seemed quite
stupid. At last one boy rather bigger than the rest took courage and
said to the others, 'Comme vous êtes bêtes'; and they all began to
eat, except one little child who screamed and tried to get away, and a
little girl who ran home. We were all anxious to go next day.

[Illustration: FRUIT-WOMAN WITH GILT CAP]


_August 12th._--We walked on the pier. There were a number of men
working at the ships; and a great many people were walking about. The
women had on full petticoats, coloured jackets, red aprons, queer
caps, gold chains, long earrings, and large buckles. The children
had high caps, and very full petticoats, so that when their backs
were turned I took them for dwarfs. Even some of the babies had old
women's caps and earrings.[43] Some of the people had very curious
caps trimmed with lace; one had a cap with the crown filled full of
frills. The most extraordinary-looking creatures were the fish-women:
I could hardly tell whether they were men or women. They had on coarse
canvas petticoats, so short that one could see their red garters; blue
jackets, and canvas belts round their waists. They brought in a great
deal of fish this evening on their backs, which they threw down in the
streets. Soon after the Peace an English gentleman brought over twelve
of these Dieppe fish-women to Brighton to see England; they galloped
up and down the streets like wild things, stopping to drink at every
public-house: he kept them for a day or two, and then sent them back.
The sea looked so smooth and pretty we wished to be on it. We saw the
Irish come in. We walked out again in the afternoon beside the chalk
cliffs. There are a number of caves in them; one large one with doors
at the entrance was full of barrels, etc., and in another was a very
deep well. At each side of the pier there is a very large crucifix.
Some men were employed driving in posts, and others in filling holes up
with mud. There were more people to-day at the table d'hôte; amongst
whom was a Frenchman who had a very rough voice; he had just returned
from England from seeing the Coronation. He scraped out the inside of
his roll, and eat a great many French beans and oil. In the evening
we saw a child's funeral passing the window: the coffin was covered
with a white cloth with flowers painted on it. We all got ready to go
down to the ship. Papa had taken the ship for ourselves, as it was so
disagreeable when we came to Calais with so many people. A lady begged
that Miss Reed (her niece), who was sixteen, might go over with us, as
her father was dead, and her mother wanted her home. She therefore went
in the same ship with us.

[Illustration: DIEPPE WOMAN AND CHILDREN]

[Illustration: DIEPPE MARKET-WOMAN]


SEA

_August 12th, 1821._--We embarked at eight o'clock on board the
_Wellington_, Captain Cheeseman: we got down to the ship by a ladder.
The moon shone beautifully on the sea. The _commissaire_ came after
we were on board; he asked William how he liked France. William said,
'Je déteste la France,' and Stewart added, 'Et je déteste la France
aussi.' We went to bed in the cabin, which was very nicely furnished;
but the beds were small and uncomfortable. Soon after we felt the ship
moving out of the harbour, and I thought with pleasure that I should
awake far from France. Mamma and Catherine, who slept in another room,
were pretty well; all the rest of us, except Euphemia, were very sick.
The light went out, and papa was obliged to awake the steward, who was
quite tipsy. The captain slept on the sofa. The steward went every now
and then to a bottle, and drank out of it.


_August 13th._--I awoke very sick. At ten minutes to six Euphemia went
upstairs to see England. After we had had some tea I went on deck,
where I lay down, very glad to leave the close, hot cabin. Euphemia was
a very useful little person; she went up and down, and got us all we
wanted. William and Stewart sang 'Merrily every bosom boundeth, merrily
oh, merrily oh.' I raised myself up to see England; the sight of the
white cliffs quite refreshed me. A boat came out at eight o'clock in
the evening; it was very rainy, but we soon got on shore. We went to
the Old Ship Inn; the beds were _very_ comfortable.


ENGLAND

_August 14th._[44]--This morning all our bones ached after being at
sea, and everything seemed topsy-turvy. It rained so hard that we could
not go out. The rooms looked very comfortable, and in the drawing-room
there was a pretty clock, and fruit under glasses. There were two
neat, civil chambermaids, who looked nicer than some of the French
ladies. Our things went to the Custom House; they examined and opened
out everything. We had to pay for all our books and drawings, and a
smelling-bottle; and for two pipes which only cost twopence a-piece we
paid eighteenpence, through a mistake of the servants about the price.


ARUNDEL

_August 15th._--Before we set out for Mrs. Howard's[45] at Arundel we
went to look at the Pavilion. I did not much admire it; it looks like
some Chinese thing. We asked a man if we could go in front of it, but
he answered very rudely that we could not. It was delightful weather
when we set off. It so happened that both when we left and when we
returned to England it was fine weather, and very cold while we were
in France. I did not think the country about Brighton so very ugly as
I had heard it was. We got on the first stage very quickly. We were
particularly struck with the neatness of the cottages; most of them
were covered with roses or vines, and the grapes were much more forward
than they were in France. Everybody looked so genteel and nice, and the
children so pretty. There is a steep hill going into Arundel, and one
has a very fine view of the castle. Before Mrs. Howard's house there
is a small terrace full of flowers; there were geraniums, and large
myrtles growing out of doors, though in France they are obliged to take
the laurels into the house in winter.


OWLS

_August 16th._--It was _very_ hot to-day. In the evening we went to see
the owls at the castle. There is a great deal of fine ivy about the
keep. There are altogether seven owls. One they call 'Lord Thurlow,'
another 'Lord Ellenborough,' and two others 'barons of the Exchequer';
they crack their bills very badly. One that had come from Hudson's Bay
could mew, bark, and make various noises. We afterwards went along a
new walk they were making, and then through a field in which were some
deer.


_August 18th._--We were surprised to observe this morning that the sun
was a bluish silver colour, more like the moon; we afterwards saw it
was noticed in the newspaper. We went to see the dresses of Mr. Wyndham
(the Catholic priest), who lived next door; he was a very civil old
man, and used to bring us in apricots and gooseberries. His dresses
were very splendid-purple, red, green, gold, etc. We saw the chapel;
there were artificial flowers, gold candlesticks, etc., on the altar.
As we were walking on the terrace we saw the Duke and Duchess of
Clarence, the Duchess of Kent, and the Princess Fedor, the Duchess of
Kent's daughter. We saw them afterwards in a carriage. I never saw any
place with such swarms of children as Arundel; but I thought them very
pretty after what I had lately seen. The weather continued oppressively
hot.


CORONATION

_August 24th._--We set off five minutes before seven. It was very
foggy. There is a pretty hill and a good deal of wood going out of
Arundel. After the fog cleared away it was _excessively_ hot; every
person looked half roasted. There were a number of pretty cottages;
most of which, and even some of the sheds, were covered with vines,
roses, and jessamines; there were also many remarkably fine hollyoaks
before the doors. Every person looked clean and neat; there seemed to
be no poverty: we did not meet with a single beggar. It was delightful
to see the green fields full of sheep and cows, all looking so happy.
There were several boats full of ladies on the Thames. We saw London
some time before we were in it; it only appeared like a great deal of
smoke. We scarcely saw any soldiers in London--very different to Paris!
We arrived at the New Hummums, Russell Street, at half-past four. In
the evening we went to Drury Lane and saw the Coronation. The first
play was very ugly. The first scene of the coronation was a distant
view of Westminster Abbey. There were a number of soldiers and people
painted at a distance. The procession was very long and beautiful.
The herb-women walked first, strewing the way with flowers; they were
dressed in white, and pink roses on their heads, and the first had
on a scarlet mantle. The king had on a crimson velvet robe with an
immense long train covered with gold stars, and borne by seven pages.
The second scene was the inside of Westminster Abbey: the ceiling was
covered with scarlet drapery; there were a great many chandeliers, and
one could not imagine anything more magnificent. There were painted
people in the galleries, and real people at one end. There was a great
deal of music and a large harmonica. The king went up to the altar,
and they put on him a purple crown. In the third scene there came in a
sailor who sang a curious song about the coronation. The fourth scene
was the banquet. There were gold plates and such a number of lights
that they made my eyes quite sore. The champion came in on horseback
and threw down the glove: two other men on horseback followed him: the
horses reared and plunged: a man in armour made of rings stood on each
side of him. It was altogether beautiful. It was very hot.


_August 25th._--Before we set off we went to Covent Garden market,
and saw some beautiful fruit in the shop windows; we had not time
to go through it, but what we saw was not to be compared to the
flower-markets in Paris. We did not see anything here very pretty. It
was _excessively_ hot when we set off. We passed several pretty houses,
and we stopped at Hampstead Heath to see Mr. and Mrs. Spedding.[46] We
dined at Welwin, not a very good inn. There were several nice little
girls dancing along with bundles of corn on their heads. We slept at
Antonbury Hill. It was a nice inn, and the people were civil.


_August 26th._--The weather to-day was quite changed: it was cold and
rainy. We dined at Grantham. In one of the towns we passed through
there were some soldiers and a band of music. We slept at Tuxford. It
was a middling inn, and the people were civil.


_August 27th._--The weather continued cold and disagreeable. We
breakfasted at Bawtry. We passed Robin Hood's well. About Ferry Bridge
we saw a number of people gathering teasels. We dined at Leeds: it is a
dirty, disagreeable town. Numbers of children ran after the carriage;
sometimes six or seven got up at a time; we had nothing to do but to
watch for them. The country was very pretty. Before Otley there is an
excessively steep hill; we walked down it: a number of children got up
behind the carriage. We slept at Otley.


_August 28th._--It was very rainy when we set off. We went along by
a river; where was a pretty wooded bay. There was a great deal of
honeysuckle in the hedges, which smelt very sweet. We breakfasted at
Skipton, where there was a cattle-market; and saw some hills near
Settle; and passed a pretty rocky river before Kirby Lonsdale. We
stayed all night at Kendal, in the same room that we were in before, in
1819.


_August 29th._--We set off at seven, happy to think we were near the
end of our journey. No person in the inn was ready. It was a dull
morning. We passed Windermere and breakfasted at Ambleside. After
this we passed some beautiful mountains very much wooded, and Rydal
Water, a pretty little lake, and also Grasmere. As soon as we passed
the boundary wall and entered Cumberland the sun came out and shone
brightly for a little while. We saw the blue mountains peeping up
behind, and the clear mountain streams. We passed Thirlmere, which is
more like a river, and Helvellyn, an ugly mountain. We saw Keswick
Lake; arrived at Keswick by one o'clock, and stayed there till three.
After we had left this, a flock of sheep ran on before the carriage for
above a mile with a man and his dog after them. The sun shone as we
went up Whinlatter; and we saw the end of Bassenthwaite; the sixth lake
we saw to-day. The time seemed very short till we reached Cockermouth,
where we saw the new bridge they were building. At last we arrived in
safety at Tallantire.

                               M. B.


Friday, _December 21st_, 1821.



Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty at the
Edinburgh University Press



[1] Married Lord Teignmouth, Conservative member for Marylebone, in
1838.--EDITOR.

[2] The steward was very civil.

[3] The packet was nearly lost going in; we lost sight of the
lighthouse in the fog, before the light was put up as a signal that
there was water enough. In standing in to discover it again, we got
into shoal water, near the breakers, and had to tack in ten feet of
water, the vessel drawing near eight feet. It was a mere accident our
not striking the ground.

[4] In after years published a clever children's book, _Aunt Effie's
Nursery Rhymes_ (illustrated), which ran through many editions; also a
volume of sacred poems, _The Dove on the Cross_.--EDITOR.

[5] We expected we were going for a carriage, so we could not think
where they were taking us; the custom-house looked more like a den of
robbers.

[6] I awoke this morning very uncomfortable; although I had been very
anxious to go to France, I now felt so far from home that I would have
done anything to get back again.

[7] The governess. This 'clever and progressive' lady published,
anonymously, in 1821, _The History of William and his Little Scholar,
Joseph, with some account of Joseph's Mother_: sketches of Cumberland
life, based on her experiences with the Brownes, from whose household
the characters were taken.--EDITOR.

[8] There is a hedge at one side of the Forest.

[9] At the doors of many of the houses we saw children eating something
out of a porringer and holding long rolls in their hands.

[10] Here papa left a pocket-handkerchief which was afterwards sent,
but another gentleman got it by mistake. The French are very honest
about stealing.

[11] They were the _Sœurs de Charité_; dressed in a black cloth jacket
and petticoat, a full apron, and a kind of linen cap. By their side
they carry a rosary, a death's head, and a pair of scissors.

[12] The room we breakfasted in was painted like a panorama.

[13] Miss Wragge went to see the Church of Notre Dame which was dressed
up with gold cloth, artificial flowers, etc., round the pillars for the
Duke of Bordeaux's baptism.

[14] Before breakfast we bought some Leghorn bonnets at Madame Denis,
Rue St. Honoré.

[15] As several men were looking down at the bear, one dropt a shilling
into the enclosure, and imprudently jumped in to get it, when the black
bear tore him to pieces as soon as he reached the bottom. A man told us
that the bear had never been well since.

[16] Mamma sent a small gold earring to Paris to be mended, instead of
which they changed it for a brass one.

[17] We saw part of the mass at Notre Dame; it was much the same as the
other.

[18] It may be of interest to quote the remarks of the author of _The
Diary of an Invalid_ (Henry Mathews), in 1819: 'The French women must,
I think, yield the palm to their English and Italian neighbours.... It
is a curious fact that in 1814, the English ladies were so possessed
with a rage for imitating even the deficiencies of their French
sisterhood, that they actually had recourse to violent means, even
to the injury of their health, to compress their beautiful bosoms as
flatly as possible, and destroy every vestige of those charms for
which, of all other women, they are perhaps the most indebted to
nature.' _Paris, May_ 28, 1819.--EDITOR.

[19] While Mademoiselle Allemagne was questioning them on geography,
Miss Fuller stood on the table fiddling with her hand and imitating M.
Bréton.

[20] When we used to work at beads, the French girls were very fond of
taking our horsehair, etc. If we discovered them they used to call us
every name they could think of, 'Diable,' 'Menteuse,' etc.

[21] The French girls seemed very ignorant; one of them (Mademoiselle
Josephe) of thirteen or fourteen, on being asked what an active verb
was, replied, 'Un verbe actif c'est un verbe passif.' Another, on being
asked what map the map of Africa was, answered, 'C'est Amérique.'

[22] A common refreshment in French parties; and a favourite medicine
also (_eau sucrée_).

[23] The French millers wear very large, curious hats.

[24] We saw a monkey in the opposite balcony which played a number of
tricks.

[25] One Sunday, when papa was at Paris, he counted nineteen places of
public amusement open; on another seventeen, besides many for the lower
classes.

[26] The milliners'shops are very ugly, but there are some very pretty
things in the others, particularly little dolls' chairs, etc., of
mother-of-pearl and gold, and flowers at the bottom. We saw some pretty
clocks; also a snuffer dish and a pair of snuffers covered with flowers
under glass.

[27] The girls think of their dresses for weeks before.

[28] They spoil them very much in _some_ things, but they are not near
so _kind_ to them as the English.

[29] I never felt anything but dull air in _France_; while we were at
Versailles six French people killed themselves.

[30] The baskets were _very_ pretty: they were ornamented with silk and
muslin.

[31] The fruit that we tasted in France (except the melons) was very
bad. Their best cherries--_cerises anglaises_--were so hard one was
obliged to chew them, their gooseberries were like blighted ones, and
their pears and plums indifferent. (Grapes were not ripe.)

[32] A Cumberland name for 'curds.'--EDITOR.

[33] She happened to be very plain.

[34] The French are _excessively_ great talkers. If one asks a question
in the street, they tell such roundabout stories one can hardly get
away. They never say they do not know a thing. We one day went in
search of a Mr. Dyas; we enquired of nearly a dozen people the way;
they each told us _different_, and not one _right_. The people in the
house he lived in directed us to a different one.

[35] There were several French _ladies_ with them, who, they said, gave
the most fashionable parties in Versailles, and were very agreeable.
These ladies were as much like ladies in their _appearance_ as
servants.

[36] I think this must be a mistake.--W. B. Indeed it is not.--M. B.

[37] A _frotteur_ is a man that comes to clean the rooms; he fastens a
small brush on to each foot and skates about the room till the boards
or flags are polished.

[38] An old-fashioned name for camellia.--EDITOR.

[39] It was a young vineyard; there were plenty of _unripe_ grapes in
the old ones, but spoiled by the weather.

[40] It rained part of the time, so we were obliged to keep up our
umbrellas.

[41] There were several pretty white buildings which were
manufactories.

[42] A number of people were standing round a woman who was quarrelling
with her husband.

[43] Some of their earrings were tied on.

[44] Papa would not pay the steward anything as he had been so tipsy
(but he asked poor Miss Reed for five shillings). Papa had also a
battle with the people, who wished to make some additional charge for
landing, which was contrary to his agreement at Dieppe.

[45] An aunt of Mrs. Browne's.--EDITOR.

[46] Of Mirehouse, Keswick.--EDITOR.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Diary of a Girl in France in 1821, by 
Mary Browne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF GIRL IN FRANCE, 1821 ***

***** This file should be named 53908-0.txt or 53908-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/9/0/53908/

Produced by Madeleine Fournier. Images provided by The Internet Archive.
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

